This article is about the American variation of gridiron football.
American football
Larry Fitzgerald (in blue) catches a pass while Cortland Finnegan (in red) plays defense at the 2009 Pro Bowl.
Highest governing body	International Federation of American Football
Worldwide (most popular in North America)
Olympic	Demonstrated at the 1904 and 1932 Summer Olympics, flag football at the 2028 Summer Olympics
World Games	
Invitational sport at 2005, 2017, and 2022 (flag football) Games
American football, referred to simply as football in the United States and Canada and also known as gridiron football,[nb 1] is a team sport played by two teams of eleven players on a rectangular field with goalposts at each end. The offense, the team with possession of the oval-shaped football, attempts to advance down the field by running with the ball or throwing it, while the defense, the team without possession of the ball, aims to stop the offense's advance and to take control of the ball for themselves. The offense must advance the ball at least ten yards in four downs or plays; if they fail, they turn over the football to the defense, but if they succeed, they are given a new set of four downs to continue the drive. Points are scored primarily by advancing the ball into the opposing team's end zone for a touchdown or kicking the ball through the opponent's goalposts for a field goal. The team with the most points at the end of the game wins.

American football evolved in the United States, originating from the sports of soccer and rugby.[3] The first American football game was played on November 6, 1869, between two college teams, Rutgers and Princeton, using rules based on the rules of soccer at the time. A set of rule changes drawn up from 1880 onward by Walter Camp, the "Father of American Football", established the snap, the line of scrimmage, eleven-player teams, and the concept of downs. Later rule changes legalized the forward pass, created the neutral zone, and specified the size and shape of the football. The sport is closely related to Canadian football, which evolved in parallel with and at the same time as the American game, although its rules were developed independently from those of Camp. Most of the features that distinguish American football from rugby and soccer are also present in Canadian football. The two sports are considered the primary variants of gridiron football.

American football is the most popular sport in the United States in terms of broadcast viewership audience. The most popular forms of the game are professional and college football, with the other major levels being high school and youth football. As of 2022, nearly 1.04 million high-school athletes play the sport in the U.S., with another 81,000 college athletes in the NCAA and the NAIA.[4] The National Football League (NFL) has one of the highest average attendance of any professional sports league in the world. Its championship game, the Super Bowl, ranks among the most-watched club sporting events globally. In 2022, the league had an annual revenue of around $18.6 billion,[5] making it the most valuable sports league in the world.[6] Other professional and amateur leagues exist worldwide, but the sport does not have the international popularity of other American sports like baseball; the sport maintains a growing following in the rest of North America, Europe, Brazil, and Japan.

Unlike most other ball sports, players of American football are not expected to play both offense and defense- usually, each player is assigned to either offense or defense, not both. As such, each individual player usually only plays for, at most, about half of the game. In modern professional American football, it is very rare, although not unheard of, for players to play both offense and defense. Players who play on both sides of the ball are more common in high school and college football.

Etymology and names
Main article: Football (word)
In the United States, American football is referred to as "football".[7] The term "football" was officially established in the rulebook for the 1876 college football season, when the sport first shifted from soccer-style rules to rugby-style rules. Although it could easily have been called "rugby" at this point, Harvard, one of the primary proponents of the rugby-style game, compromised and did not request the name of the sport be changed to "rugby".[8] The terms "gridiron" or "American football" are favored in English-speaking countries where other types of football are popular, such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, New Zealand, and Australia.[9][10]

History
Main articles: History of American football and American football in the United States
Part of the American football series on the
History of American football
Origins of American football
Early historyModern historyFirst gameFirst pro leagueFirst pro playerWalter Camp
Close relations to other codes
AustralianBoston gameCanadianMedievalOld divisionRugby leagueRugby unionSoccer
Topics
Black players in professional footballCanadian football comparisonConcussionsGlossaryHall of Fame (College)Hall of Fame (Pro)HomosexualityRugby league comparisonRugby union comparisonYears College seasonsNFL seasons
American football Portal
vte
Early history
Main article: Early history of American football
American football evolved from the sports of rugby and soccer. Rugby, like American football, is a sport in which two competing teams vie for control of a ball, which can be kicked through a set of goalposts or run into the opponent's goal area to score points.[11]

What is considered to be the first American football game was played on November 6, 1869, between Rutgers and Princeton, two college teams. They consisted of 25 players per team and used a round ball that could not be picked up or carried. It could, however, be kicked or batted with the feet, hands, head, or sides, with the objective being to advance it into the opponent's goal. Rutgers won the game 6–4.[12][13] Collegiate play continued for several years with games played using the rules of the host school. Representatives of Yale, Columbia, Princeton and Rutgers met on October 19, 1873, to create a standard set of rules for use by all schools. Teams were set at 20 players each, and fields of 400 by 250 feet (122 m × 76 m) were specified. Harvard abstained from the conference, as they favored a rugby-style game that allowed running with the ball.[13] After playing McGill University using both American (known as "the Boston game") for the first game and Canadian (rugby) rules for the second one,[13][14] the Harvard players preferred the Canadian style of having only 11 men on the field, running the ball without having to be chased by an opponent, the forward pass, tackling, and using an oblong instead of a round ball.[15][16]

An 1875 Harvard–Yale game played under rugby-style rules was observed by two Princeton athletes who were impressed by it. They introduced the sport to Princeton, a feat the Professional Football Researchers Association compared to "selling refrigerators to Eskimos".[13] Princeton, Harvard, Yale, and Columbia then agreed to intercollegiate play using a form of rugby union rules with a modified scoring system.[17] These schools formed the Intercollegiate Football Association, although Yale did not join until 1879. Yale player Walter Camp, now regarded as the "Father of American Football",[17][18] secured rule changes in 1880 that reduced the size of each team from 15 to 11 players and instituted the snap to replace the chaotic and inconsistent scrum.[17] While the game between Rutgers and Princeton is commonly considered the first American football game, several years prior in 1862, the Oneida Football Club formed as the oldest known football club in the United States. The team consisted of graduates of Boston's elite preparatory schools and played from 1862 to 1865.[19]

Evolution of the game
Walter Camp standing by the railing on a bridge
Walter Camp, the "Father of American Football", in 1878 when Camp was captain of Yale University's football team
Cartoon showing a figure with a skeletal head holding a football upright with extended arms while lying down on a football field
The dangers associated with the sport depicted in a 1908 cartoon by William Charles Morris
The introduction of the snap resulted in an unexpected consequence. Before the snap, the strategy had been to punt if a scrum resulted in bad field position. However, a group of Princeton players realized that, as the snap was uncontested, they could now hold the ball indefinitely to prevent their opponent from scoring. In 1881, in a game between Yale and Princeton, both teams used this strategy to maintain their undefeated records. Each team held the ball, gaining no ground, for an entire half, resulting in a 0–0 tie. This "block game" proved extremely unpopular with both teams' spectators and fans.[17]

A rule change was necessary to prevent this strategy from taking hold, and a reversion to the scrum was considered. However, Camp successfully proposed a rule in 1882 that limited each team to three downs, or tackles, to advance the ball 5 yards (4.6 m). Failure to advance the ball the required distance within those three downs would result in control of the ball being forfeited to the other team. This change effectively made American football a separate sport from rugby, and the resulting five-yard lines added to the field to measure distances made it resemble a gridiron in appearance. Other major rule changes included a reduction of the field size to 110 by 53+1⁄3 yards (100.6 m × 48.8 m) and the adoption of a scoring system that awarded four points for a touchdown, two for a safety and a goal following a touchdown, and five for a goal from the field. Additionally, tackling below the waist was legalized,[17] and a static line of scrimmage was instituted.[20]

Despite these new rules, football remained a violent sport. Dangerous mass-formations like the flying wedge resulted in serious injuries and deaths.[21] A 1905 peak of 19 fatalities nationwide resulted in a threat by President Theodore Roosevelt to abolish the game unless major changes were made.[22] In response, 62 colleges and universities met in New York City to discuss rule changes on December 28, 1905. These proceedings resulted in the formation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States, later renamed the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA).[23]

The legal forward pass was introduced in 1906, although its effect was initially minimal due to the restrictions placed on its use. The idea of a 40-yard-wider field was opposed by Harvard due to the size of the new Harvard Stadium.[24] Other rule changes introduced that year included the reduction of playing time from 70 to 60 minutes and an increase of the distance required for a first down from 5 to 10 yards (4.6 to 9.1 m). To reduce infighting and dirty play between teams, the neutral zone was created along the width of the football before the snap.[25] Scoring was also adjusted: points awarded for field goals were reduced to three in 1909[18] and points for touchdowns were raised to six in 1912.[26] Also in 1912, the field was shortened to 100 yards (91 m) long, two 10-yard-long (9.1 m) end zones were created, and teams were given four downs instead of three to advance the ball 10 yards (9.1 m).[27][28] The roughing the passer penalty was implemented in 1914, and eligible players were first allowed to catch the ball anywhere on the field in 1918.[29]

Professional era
Photo of William Heffelfinger
Pudge Heffelfinger, widely regarded as the first professional football player
On November 12, 1892, Pudge Heffelfinger was paid $500 (equivalent to $17,498 in 2024) to play a game for the Allegheny Athletic Association against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club. This is the first recorded instance of a player being paid to participate in a game of American football, although many athletic clubs in the 1880s offered indirect benefits, such as helping players attain employment, giving out trophies or watches that players could pawn for money, or paying double in expense money. Despite these extra benefits, the game had a strict sense of amateurism at the time, and direct payment to players was frowned upon, if not prohibited outright.[30]

Over time, professional play became increasingly common, and with it came rising salaries and unpredictable player movement, as well as the illegal payment of college players who were still in school. The National Football League (NFL), a group of professional teams that was originally established in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association, aimed to solve these problems. This new league's stated goals included an end to bidding wars over players, prevention of the use of college players, and abolition of the practice of paying players to leave another team.[31] By 1922, the NFL had established itself as America's premier professional football league.[32]

The dominant form of football at the time was played at the collegiate level. The upstart NFL received a boost to its legitimacy in 1925, however, when an NFL team, the Pottsville Maroons, defeated a team of Notre Dame all-stars in an exhibition game.[33] A greater emphasis on the passing game helped professional football to distinguish itself further from the college game during the late 1930s.[31] Football, in general, became increasingly popular following the 1958 NFL Championship game between the Baltimore Colts and the New York Giants, still referred to as the "Greatest Game Ever Played". The game, a 23–17 overtime victory by the Colts, was seen by millions of television viewers and had a major influence on the popularity of the sport. This, along with the innovations introduced by the new American Football League (AFL) in the early 1960s, helped football to become the most popular sport in the United States by the mid-1960s.[34]

The rival AFL arose in 1960 and challenged the NFL's dominance. The AFL began in relative obscurity but eventually thrived, with an initial television contract with the ABC television network. The AFL's existence forced the conservative NFL to expand to Dallas and Minnesota in an attempt to destroy the new league. Meanwhile, the AFL introduced many new features to professional football in the United States: official time was kept on a scoreboard clock rather than on a watch in the referee's pocket, as the NFL did; optional two-point conversions by pass or run after touchdowns; names on the jerseys of players; and several others, including expansion of the role of minority players, actively recruited by the league in contrast to the NFL. The AFL also signed several star college players who had also been drafted by NFL teams. Competition for players heated up in 1965, when the AFL New York Jets signed rookie Joe Namath to a then-record $437,000 contract (equivalent to $4.36 million in 2023). A five-year, $40 million NBC television contract followed, which helped to sustain the young league. The bidding war for players ended in 1966 when NFL owners approached the AFL regarding a merger, and the two leagues agreed on one that took full effect in 1970. This agreement provided for a common draft that would take place each year, and it instituted an annual World Championship game to be played between the champions of each league. This championship game began play at the end of the 1966 season. Once the merger was completed, it was no longer a championship game between two leagues and reverted to the NFL championship game, which came to be known as the Super Bowl.[35]

College football maintained a tradition of postseason bowl games. Each bowl game was associated with a particular conference and earning a spot in a bowl game was the reward for winning a conference. This arrangement was profitable, but it tended to prevent the two top-ranked teams from meeting in a true national championship game, as they would normally be committed to the bowl games of their respective conferences. Several systems have been used since 1992 to determine a national champion of college football. The first was the Bowl Coalition, in place from 1992 to 1994. This was replaced in 1995 by the Bowl Alliance, which gave way to the Bowl Championship Series (BCS) in 1997.[36] The BCS arrangement proved to be controversial, and was replaced in 2014 by the College Football Playoff (CFP).[37][38]

Teams and positions
Main article: American football positions
Diagram showing a green background with a white horizontal line dividing it into two-halves, with eleven small blue squares representing defense players in a formation above the line, and eleven small red circles representing offense players in another formation below the line, with two text captions "Defense" and "Offense", the former placed above the line and the latter below the line
A diagram of a typical pre-snap formation. The offense (red) is lined up in a variation of the I formation, while the defense (blue) is lined up in the 4–3 defense. Both formations are legal.
A football game is played between two teams of 11 players each.[39][40][41] Playing with more on the field is punishable by a penalty.[39][42][43] Teams may substitute any number of their players between downs;[44][45][46] this "platoon" system replaced the original system, which featured limited substitution rules, and has resulted in teams utilizing specialized offensive, defensive and special teams units.[47] The number of players allowed on an active roster varies by league; the NFL has a 53-man roster,[48] while NCAA Division I allows teams to have 63 scholarship players in the FCS and 85 scholarship players in the FBS, respectively.[49]

Individual players in a football game must be designated with a uniform number between 0 and 99, though some teams may "retire" certain numbers, making them unavailable to players. NFL teams are required to number their players by a league-approved numbering system, and any exceptions must be approved by the commissioner.[39] NCAA and NFHS teams are "strongly advised" to number their offensive players according to a league-suggested numbering scheme.[50][51]

Although the sport is played almost exclusively by men, women are eligible to play in high school, college, and professional football. No woman has ever played in the NFL, but women have played in high school and college football games.[52] In 2018, 1,100 of the 225,000 players in Pop Warner Little Scholars youth football were girls, and around 11% of the 5.5 million Americans who report playing tackle football are female according to the Sports and Fitness Industry Association.[53]

Offensive unit

A quarterback for the Kiel Baltic Hurricanes in Germany under center and ready to take the snap
The role of the offensive unit is to advance the football down the field with the ultimate goal of scoring a touchdown.[54]

The offensive team must line up in a legal formation before they can snap the ball. An offensive formation is considered illegal if there are more than four players in the backfield or fewer than five players numbered 50–79 on the offensive line.[40][55][56] Players can line up temporarily in a position whose eligibility is different from what their number permits as long as they report the change immediately to the referee, who then informs the defensive team of the change.[57] Neither team's players, except the center (C), are allowed to line up in or cross the neutral zone until the ball is snapped. Interior offensive linemen are not allowed to move until the snap of the ball.[58]

The main backfield positions are the quarterback (QB), halfback/tailback (HB/TB), and fullback (FB). The quarterback is the leader of the offense. Either the quarterback or a coach calls the plays. Quarterbacks typically inform the rest of the offense of the play in the huddle before the team lines up. The quarterback lines up behind the center to take the snap and then hands the ball off, throws it, or runs with it.[54]

The primary role of the halfback, also known as the running back or tailback, is to carry the ball on running plays. Halfbacks may also serve as receivers. Fullbacks tend to be larger than halfbacks and function primarily as blockers, but they are sometimes used as runners in short-yardage or goal-line situations.[59] They are seldom used as receivers.[60]

The offensive line (OL) consists of several players whose primary function is to block members of the defensive line from tackling the ball carrier on running plays or sacking the quarterback on passing plays.[59] The leader of the offensive line is the center, who is responsible for snapping the ball to the quarterback, blocking,[59] and for making sure that the other linemen do their jobs during the play.[61] On either side of the center are the guards (G), while tackles (T) line up outside the guards.

The principal receivers are the wide receivers (WR) and the tight ends (TE).[62] Wide receivers line up on or near the line of scrimmage, split outside the line. The main goal of the wide receiver is to catch passes thrown by the quarterback,[59] but they may also function as decoys or as blockers during running plays. Tight ends line up outside the tackles and function both as receivers and as blockers.[59]

Defensive unit
Photograph of defensive players tackling an offensive player who has just lost control of the football
Defensive players with the Dallas Cowboys forcing Arian Foster, a running back with the Houston Texans, to fumble the ball.
The role of the defense is to prevent the offense from scoring by tackling the ball carrier or by forcing turnovers. Turnovers include interceptions (a defender catching a forward pass intended for the offense) and forced fumbles (taking possession of the ball from the ball-carrier).[54]

The defensive line (DL) consists of defensive ends (DE) and defensive tackles (DT). Defensive ends line up on the ends of the line, while defensive tackles line up inside, between the defensive ends. The primary responsibilities of defensive ends and defensive tackles are to stop running plays on the outside and inside, respectively, to pressure the quarterback on passing plays, and to occupy the line so that the linebackers can break through.[59]

Linebackers line up behind the defensive line but in front of the defensive backfield. They are divided into two types: middle linebackers (MLB) and outside linebackers (OLB). Linebackers tend to serve as the defensive leaders and call the defensive plays, given their vantage point of the offensive backfield. Their roles include defending the run, pressuring the quarterback, and tackling backs, wide receivers, and tight ends in the passing game.[63]

The defensive backfield, often called the secondary, consists of cornerbacks (CB) and safeties (S). Safeties are themselves divided into free safeties (FS) and strong safeties (SS).[59] Cornerbacks line up outside the defensive formation, typically opposite a receiver to be able to cover them. Safeties line up between the cornerbacks but farther back in the secondary. Safeties tend to be viewed as "the last line of defense" and are responsible for stopping deep passing plays as well as breakout running plays.[59]

Special teams unit
Four players run up the field as the kicker executes a kickoff
Kicker Jeff Reed of the Pittsburgh Steelers executes a kickoff
The special teams unit is responsible for all kicking plays. The special teams unit of the team in control of the ball tries to execute field goal (FG) attempts, punts, and kickoffs, while the opposing team's unit will aim to block or return them.[54]

Three positions are specific to the field goal and PAT (point-after-touchdown) unit: the placekicker (K or PK), holder (H), and long snapper (LS). The long snapper's job is to snap the football to the holder, who will catch and position it for the placekicker. There is not usually a holder on kickoffs, because the ball is kicked off a tee; however, a holder may be used in certain situations, such as if wind is preventing the ball from remaining upright on the tee. The player on the receiving team who catches the ball is known as the kickoff returner (KR).[64]

The positions specific to punt plays are the punter (P), long snapper, upback, and gunner. The long snapper snaps the football directly to the punter, who then drops and kicks it before it hits the ground. Gunners line up split outside the line and race down the field, aiming to tackle the punt returner (PR)—the player who catches the punt. Upbacks line up a short distance behind the line of scrimmage, providing additional protection to the punter.[65]

Rules
Main article: American football rules
Scoring
A player pursued by an opponent dives into the end zone in front of an official to score a touchdown.
A player for the Navy Midshipmen (dark jersey) scores a touchdown while a defender from the Tulsa Golden Hurricane (in white) looks on. The goal line is marked by the small orange pylon.
In football, the winner is the team that has scored more points at the end of the game. There are multiple ways to score in a football game. The touchdown (TD), worth six points, is the most valuable scoring play in American football. A touchdown is scored when a live ball is advanced into, caught, or recovered in the opposing team's end zone.[54] The scoring team then attempts a try, more commonly known as the point(s)-after-touchdown (PAT) or conversion, which is a single scoring opportunity. This is generally attempted from the two- or three-yard line, depending on the level of play. If the PAT is scored by a place kick or drop kick through the goal posts, it is worth one point, typically called the extra point. If the PAT is scored by what would normally be a touchdown, it is worth two points; this is known as a two-point conversion. In general, the extra point is almost always successful, while the two-point conversion is a much riskier play with a higher probability of failure; accordingly, extra point attempts are far more common than two-point conversion attempts.[66]

A field goal (FG), worth three points, is scored when the ball is place kicked or drop kicked through the uprights and over the crossbars of the defense's goalposts.[67][68][69] In practice, almost all field goal attempts are done via place kick. While drop kicks were common in the early days of the sport, the shape of modern footballs makes it difficult to reliably drop kick the ball. The last successful scoring play by drop kick in the NFL was accomplished in 2006; prior to that, the last successful drop kick had been made in 1941.[70] After a PAT attempt or successful field goal, the scoring team must kick the ball off to the other team.[71]

A safety is scored when the ball carrier is tackled in the carrier's own end zone. Safeties are worth two points, which are awarded to the defense.[54] In addition, the team that conceded the safety must kick the ball to the scoring team via a free kick.[72]

Field and equipment
Main article: American football field
Photograph of a football field taken from the end zone showing goal posts in the foreground
The football field at The Dome at America's Center in St. Louis as seen from behind one end zone. The tall, yellow goal posts mark where the ball must pass for a successful field goal or extra point. The large, rectangular area marked with the team name is the end zone.
Football games are played on a rectangular field that measures 120 yards (110 m) long and 53+1⁄3 yards (48.8 m) wide. Lines marked along the ends and sides of the field are known as the end lines and sidelines. Goal lines are marked 10 yards (9.1 m) inward from each end line.[73][74][75]

Weighted pylons are placed the sidelines on the inside corner of the intersections with the goal lines and end lines. White markings on the field identify the distance from the end zone. Inbound lines, or hash marks, are short parallel lines that mark off 1-yard (0.91 m) increments. Yard lines, which can run the width of the field, are marked every 5 yards (4.6 m). A one-yard-wide line is placed at each end of the field; this line is marked at the center of the two-yard line in professional play and at the three-yard line in college play. Numerals that display the distance from the closest goal line in yards are placed on both sides of the field every ten yards.[73][74][75]

Goalposts are located at the center of the plane of the two end lines. The crossbar of these posts is 10 feet (3.0 m) above the ground, with vertical uprights at the end of the crossbar 18 feet 6 inches (5.64 m) apart for professional and collegiate play, and 23 feet 4 inches (7.11 m) apart for high school play.[76][77][78] The uprights extend vertically 35 feet (11 m) on professional fields, a minimum of 10 yards (9.1 m) on college fields, and a minimum of 10 feet (3.0 m) on high school fields. Goal posts are padded at the base, and orange ribbons are normally placed at the tip of each upright as indicators of wind strength and direction.[76][77][78]

The football itself is a prolate spheroid leather ball, similar to the balls used in rugby or Australian rules football.[79] To contain the compressed air within it, a pig's bladder was commonly used before the advent of artificial rubber inside the leather outer shell to sustain crushing forces.[80][81] At all levels of play, the football is inflated to 12+1⁄2 to 13+1⁄2 psi (86 to 93 kPa), or just under one atmosphere, and weighs 14 to 15 ounces (400 to 430 g);[78][82][83] beyond that, the exact dimensions vary slightly. In professional play the ball has a long axis of 11 to 11+1⁄4 inches (28 to 29 cm), a long circumference of 28 to 28+1⁄2 inches (71 to 72 cm), and a short circumference of 21 to 21+1⁄4 inches (53 to 54 cm).[84] In college and high school play the ball has a long axis of 10+7⁄8 to 11+7⁄16 inches (27.6 to 29.1 cm), a long circumference of 27+3⁄4 to 28+1⁄2 inches (70 to 72 cm), and a short circumference of 20+3⁄4 to 21+1⁄4 inches (53 to 54 cm).[78][82]

Duration and time stoppages
Football games last for a total of 60 minutes in professional and college play and are divided into two halves of 30 minutes and four quarters of 15 minutes.[85][86] High school football games are 48 minutes in length with two halves of 24 minutes and four quarters of 12 minutes.[87] The two halves are separated by a halftime period, and the first and third quarters are followed by a short break.[85][86][88] Before the game starts, the referee and each team's captain meet at midfield for a coin toss. The visiting team can call either "heads" or "tails"; the winner of the toss chooses whether to receive or kick off the ball or which goal they wish to defend. They can defer their choice until the second half. Unless the winning team decides to defer, the losing team chooses the option the winning team did not select—to receive, kick, or select a goal to defend to begin the second half. Most teams choose to receive or defer, because choosing to kick the ball to start the game allows the other team to choose which goal to defend.[89] Teams switch goals following the first and third quarters.[90] If a down is in progress when a quarter ends, play continues until the down is completed.[91][92][93] If certain fouls are committed during play while time has expired, the quarter may be extended through an untimed down.[94]

Games last longer than their defined length due to play stoppages—the average NFL game lasts slightly over three hours.[95] Time in a football game is measured by the game clock. An operator is responsible for starting, stopping and operating the game clock based on the direction of the appropriate official.[85][96] A separate play clock is used to show the amount of time within which the offense must initiate a play. The play clock is set to 25 seconds after certain administrative stoppages in play and to 40 seconds when play is proceeding without such stoppages. If the offense fails to start a play before the play clock reads "00", a delay of game foul is called on the offense.[91][97][98]

Advancing the ball and downs
A quarterback is shown in the process of throwing a forward pass. His offensive linemen are in front of him.
Carolina Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme (number 17) in the motion of throwing a forward pass
There are two main ways the offense can advance the ball: running and passing. In a typical play, the center passes the ball backwards and between their legs to the quarterback in a process known as the snap. The quarterback then either hands the ball off to a running back, throws the ball, or runs with it. The play ends when the player with the ball is tackled or goes out-of-bounds or a pass hits the ground without a player having caught it. A forward pass can be legally attempted only if the passer is behind the line of scrimmage; only one forward pass can be attempted per down.[71] As in rugby, players can also pass the ball backwards at any point during a play.[99] In the NFL, a down also ends immediately if the runner's helmet comes off.[100]

The offense is given a series of four plays, known as downs. If the offense advances ten or more yards in the four downs, they are awarded a new set of four downs. If they fail to advance ten yards, possession of the football is turned over to the defense. In most situations, if the offense reaches their fourth down they will punt the ball to the other team, which forces them to begin their drive from farther down the field; if they are in field goal range, they might attempt to score a field goal instead.[71] A group of officials, the chain crew, keeps track of both the downs and the distance measurements.[101] On television, a yellow line is electronically superimposed on the field to show the first down line to the viewing audience.[102]

Kicking
A placekicker attempts a field goal by kicking the ball from the hands of a holder.
Tampa Bay Buccaneers placekicker Connor Barth attempts a field goal by kicking the ball from the hands of a holder. This is the standard method to score field goals or extra points.[103][104]
There are two categories of kicks in football: scrimmage kicks, which can be executed by the offensive team on any down from behind or on the line of scrimmage,[105][106][107] and free kicks.[108][109][110] The free kicks are the kickoff, which starts the first and third quarters and overtime and follows a try attempt or a successful field goal; the safety kick follows a safety.[106][111][112]

On a kickoff, the ball is placed at the 35-yard line of the kicking team in professional and college play and at the 40-yard line in high school play. The ball may be drop kicked or place kicked. If a place kick is chosen, the ball can be placed on the ground or a tee; a holder may be used in either case. On a safety kick, the kicking team kicks the ball from their own 20-yard line. They can punt, drop kick or place kick the ball, but a tee may not be used in professional play. Any member of the receiving team may catch or advance the ball. The ball may be recovered by the kicking team once it has gone at least ten yards and has touched the ground or has been touched by any member of the receiving team.[113][114][115]

The three types of scrimmage kicks are place kicks, drop kicks, and punts. Only place kicks and drop kicks can score points.[67][68][69] The place kick is the standard method used to score points,[103] because the pointy shape of the football makes it difficult to reliably drop kick.[103][104] Once the ball has been kicked from a scrimmage kick, it can be advanced by the kicking team only if it is caught or recovered behind the line of scrimmage. If it is touched or recovered by the kicking team beyond this line, it becomes dead at the spot where it was touched.[116][117][118] The kicking team is prohibited from interfering with the receiver's opportunity to catch the ball. The receiving team has the option of signaling for a fair catch, which prohibits the defense from blocking into or tackling the receiver. The play ends as soon as the ball is caught, and the ball may not be advanced.[119][120][121]

Officials and fouls
See also: Official (American football), Chain crew, and Penalty (gridiron football)
Seven officials are pictured meeting at the infield. Officials meeting at midfield
Officials meeting at midfield
Officials are using a chain to measure for a first down.
Officials in a game between Eastern Washington and Cal Berkeley use the chains to measure for a first down. Here, the ball is just short of the pole and therefore short of a first down.
Photograph of a down indicator box on a pole
A modern down indicator box is mounted on a pole and is used to mark the current line of scrimmage. The number on the marker is changed using a dial.
Officials are responsible for enforcing game rules and monitoring the clock. All officials carry a whistle and wear black-and-white striped shirts and black hats except for the referee, whose hat is white. Each carries a weighted yellow flag that is thrown to the ground to signal that a foul has been called. An official who spots multiple fouls will throw their hat as a secondary signal.[122] Women can serve as officials; Sarah Thomas became the NFL's first female official in 2015.[123] The seven officials (of a standard seven-man crew; lower levels of play up to the college level use fewer officials) on the field are each tasked with a different set of responsibilities:[122]

The referee is positioned behind and to the side of the offensive backs. The referee is charged with oversight and control of the game and is the authority on the score, the down number, and any rule interpretations in discussions among the other officials. The referee announces all penalties and discusses the infraction with the offending team's captain, monitors for illegal hits against the quarterback, makes requests for first-down measurements, and notifies the head coach whenever a player is ejected. The referee positions themselves to the passing arm side of the quarterback. In most games, the referee is responsible for spotting the football prior to a play from scrimmage.
The umpire is positioned in the defensive backfield, except in the NFL, where the umpire is positioned lateral to the referee on the opposite side of the formation. The umpire watches play along the line of scrimmage to make sure that no more than 11 offensive players are on the field before the snap, and that no offensive linemen are illegally downfield on pass plays. The umpire monitors contact between offensive and defensive linemen and calls most of the holding penalties. The umpire records the number of timeouts taken and the winner of the coin toss and game score. They also assist the referee in situations involving possession of the ball close to the line of scrimmage, determines whether player equipment is legal, and dries wet balls prior to the snap if a game is played in rain.
The back judge is positioned deep in the defensive backfield, behind the umpire. The back judge ensures that the defensive team has no more than 11 players on the field and determines whether catches are legal, whether field goal or extra point attempts are good, and whether a pass interference violation occurred. The back judge is also responsible for the play clock, the time between each play, when a visible play clock is not used.
The head linesman/down judge is positioned on one end of the line of scrimmage. The head linesman/down judge watches for any line-of-scrimmage and illegal use-of-hands violations and assists the line judge with illegal shift or illegal motion calls. The head linesman/down judge also rules on out-of-bounds calls that happen on their side of the field, oversees the chain crew, and marks the forward progress of a runner when a play has been whistled dead.
The side judge is positioned twenty yards downfield of the head linesman. The side judge mainly duplicates the functions of the field judge. On field goal and extra point attempts, the side judge is positioned lateral to the umpire.
The line judge is positioned on the end of the line of scrimmage, opposite the head linesman. They supervise player substitutions, the line of scrimmage during punts, and game timing. The line judge notifies the referee when time has expired at the end of a quarter and notifies the head coach of the home team when five minutes remain for halftime. In the NFL, the line judge also alerts the referee when two minutes remain in the half. If the clock malfunctions or becomes inoperable, the line judge becomes the official timekeeper.
The field judge is positioned twenty yards downfield from the line judge. The field judge monitors and controls the play clock, counts the number of defensive players on the field, and watches for offensive pass interference and illegal use-of-hands violations by offensive players. The field judge also makes decisions regarding catches, recoveries, the ball spot when a player goes out of bounds, and illegal touching of fumbled balls that have crossed the line of scrimmage. On field goal and extra point attempts, the field judge is stationed under the upright opposite the back judge.
The center judge is an eighth official used only in the top level of college football. The center judge stands lateral to the referee, the same way the umpire does in the NFL. The center judge is responsible for spotting the football after each play and has many of the same responsibilities as the referee, except announcing penalties.
Another set of officials, the chain crew, are responsible for moving the chains. The chains, consisting of two large sticks with a 10-yard-long chain between them, are used to measure for a first down. The chain crew stays on the sidelines during the game, but if requested by the officials they will briefly bring the chains on to the field to measure. A typical chain crew will have at least three people—two members of the chain crew will hold either of the two sticks, while a third will hold the down marker. The down marker, a large stick with a dial on it, is flipped after each play to indicate the current down and is typically moved to the approximate spot of the ball. The chain crew system has been used for over 100 years and is considered an accurate measure of distance, rarely subject to criticism from either side.[101]

Safety and brain health
See also: Protective equipment in gridiron football and Health issues in American football
Photograph of a player wearing a helmet, with shoulder pads and thigh pads visible under their uniform
Vince Agnew, then with the Miami Dolphins, wearing a helmet with his shoulder pads and thigh pads visible under his uniform
Football is a full-contact sport, and injuries are relatively common. Most injuries occur during training sessions, particularly ones that involve contact between players.[124] To try to prevent injuries, players are required to wear a set of equipment. At a minimum players must wear a football helmet and a set of shoulder pads, but individual leagues may require additional padding such as thigh pads and guards, knee pads, chest protectors, and mouthguards.[125][126][127] Most injuries occur in the lower extremities, particularly in the knee, but a significant number also affect the upper extremities. The most common types of injuries are strains, sprains, bruises, fractures, dislocations, and concussions.[124]

Repeated concussions (and possibly sub-concussive head impacts[128]) can increase a person's risk in later life for CTE (chronic traumatic encephalopathy) and health issues such as dementia, Parkinson's disease, and depression.[129] Concussions are often caused by helmet-to-helmet or upper-body contact between opposing players, although helmets have prevented more serious injuries such as skull fractures.[130] Various programs are aiming to reduce concussions by reducing the frequency of helmet-to-helmet hits; USA Football's "Heads Up Football" program aims to reduce concussions in youth football by teaching coaches and players about the signs of a concussion, the proper way to wear football equipment and ensure it fits, and proper tackling methods that avoid anyone who has ever watched an NFL-to-helmet contact.[131] However, a study in the Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine found that Heads Up Football was ineffective; the same study noted that more extensive reforms implemented by Pop Warner Little Scholars and its member teams were effective in significantly reducing concussion rates.[132]

A 2018 study performed by the VA Boston Healthcare System and the Boston University School of Medicine found that tackle football before age 12 was correlated with earlier onset of symptoms of CTE, but not with symptom severity. More specifically, each year a player played tackle football under age 12 predicted earlier onset of cognitive, behavioral, and mood problems by an average of two and a half years.[133][134][135]

Leagues and tournaments
]

See also: Comparisons between the National Football League and NCAA football

A high school football game at New Canaan High School in New Canaan, Connecticut
The National Football League (NFL) and the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) are the most popular football leagues in the United States.[136] The National Football League was founded in 1920[137] and has since become the largest and most popular sport in the United States.[138] The NFL has the highest average attendance of any sporting league in the world, with an average attendance of 66,960 during the 2011 NFL season.[139] The NFL championship game is called the Super Bowl, and is among the biggest events in club sports worldwide.[140] It is played between the champions of the National Football Conference (NFC) and the American Football Conference (AFC), and its winner is awarded the Vince Lombardi Trophy.[141]

College football is the third-most popular sport in the United States, behind professional baseball and professional football.[142] The NCAA, the largest collegiate organization, is divided into three Divisions: Division I, Division II and Division III.[143] Division I football is further divided into two subdivisions: the Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) and the Football Championship Subdivision (FCS).[144] The champions of each level of play are determined through NCAA-sanctioned playoff systems; while the champion of Division I-FBS was historically determined by various polls and ranking systems, the subdivision adopted a four-team playoff system in 2014.[145]

High school football is the most popular sport in the United States played by boys; over 1.1 million boys participated in the sport from 2007 to 2008 according to a survey by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS). There is a stark contrast in youth football participation between boys and girls. Only one youth football league exists in the United States for girls, the GFL. The NFHS is the largest organization for high school football, with member associations in all 50 states as well as the District of Columbia. USA Football is the governing body for youth and amateur football,[146] and Pop Warner Little Scholars is the largest organization for youth football.[147]

Other professional leagues
Rival leagues
The most successful league to directly compete with the NFL was the American Football League (AFL), which existed from 1960 to 1969. The AFL became a significant rival in 1964 before signing a five-year, US$36 million television deal with NBC. AFL teams began signing NFL players to contracts, and the league's popularity grew to challenge that of the NFL. The two leagues merged in the 1970 season, and all the AFL teams joined the NFL. An earlier league, the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), was in play from 1946 to 1949. After it had dissolved, two AAFC teams, the Cleveland Browns and the San Francisco 49ers, became members of the NFL; another member, the Baltimore Colts joined the league, but folded after just a year in the NFL.[148]

Other attempts to start rival leagues since the AFL merged with the NFL in 1970 have been far less successful, as professional football salaries and the NFL's television contracts began to escalate out of the reach of competitors and the NFL covered more of the larger cities. The World Football League (WFL) played for two seasons, in 1974 and 1975, but faced such severe monetary issues it could not pay its players. In its second and final season the WFL attempted to establish a stable credit rating, but the league disbanded before the season could be completed.[149] The United States Football League (USFL) operated for three seasons from 1983 to 1985. Originally not intended as a rival league, the entry of owners who sought marquee talent and to challenge the NFL led to an escalation in salaries and ensuing financial losses. A subsequent US$1.5 billion antitrust lawsuit against the NFL was successful in court, but the league was awarded only $1 in damages, which was automatically tripled to $3 under antitrust law.[150]

Complementary national leagues
The original XFL, created in 2001 by Vince McMahon, lasted for only one season. Despite television contracts with NBC and UPN, and high expectations, the XFL suffered from low quality of play and poor reception for its use of tawdry professional wrestling gimmicks, which caused initially high ratings and attendance to collapse.[151] The XFL was rebooted in 2020.[152] However, after only five weeks of play, the league's operations slowly came to a close due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic,[153] and filed for bankruptcy on April 13.[154] The United Football League (UFL) began in 2009 but folded after suspending its 2012 season amid declining interest and lack of major television coverage.[155] The Alliance of American Football lasted less than one season, unable to keep investors.[156]

International play
Photograph of a Mexican youth division football team
Players with one of the youth divisions of the Borregos Salvajes football program of the Monterrey Institute of Technology and Higher Education in Mexico City
American football leagues exist throughout the world. [157] It is not an Olympic sport, but it was a demonstration sport at the 1932 Summer Olympics.[158] At the international level, Canada, Mexico, and Japan are considered to be second-tier, while Austria, Germany, and France would rank among a third tier. These countries rank far below the United States, which is dominant at the international level.[159]

NFL Europa, the developmental league of the NFL, operated from 1991 to 1992 and then from 1995 to 2007. At the time of its closure, NFL Europa had five teams based in Germany and one in the Netherlands.[160] In Germany, the German Football League (GFL) has 16 teams and has operated for over 40 seasons, with the league's championship game, the German Bowl, closing out each season. The league operates in a promotion and relegation structure with German Football League 2 (GFL2), which also has 16 teams.[161] The BIG6 European Football League functions as a continental championship for Europe. The competition is contested between the top six European teams.[161]

The United Kingdom also operated several teams within NFL Europe during the League's tenure.[162] The resulting rise in popularity of the sport brought the NFL back to the country in 2007 where they now hold the NFL International Series in London, currently consisting of four regular season games.[163][164] The continuing interest and growth in both the sport and the series has led to the possible formation of a potential NFL franchise in London[165][166][167]

An American football league system already exists within the UK, the BAFANL, which has run under various guises since 1983. It currently has 70 teams operating across the tiers of contact football in which teams aim to earn promotion to the Division above, with the Premier Division teams competing to win the Britbowl, the annual British Football Bowl game that has been played since 1985.[168][169][170] In 2007, the British Universities American Football League was formed. From 2008, the BUAFL was officially associated with the National Football League (NFL), through its partner organization NFL UK.[171] In 2012, BUAFL's league and teams were absorbed into BUCS after American football became an official BUCS sport.[172] Over the period 2007 to 2014, the BUAFL grew from 42 teams and 2,460 participants to 75 teams and over 4,100 people involved.[173]

American football federations are present in Africa, the Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania; a total of 75 national football federations exist as of 2023.[174] The International Federation of American Football (IFAF), an international governing body composed of continental federations, runs tournaments such as the IFAF World Championship, the IFAF Women's World Championship, the IFAF U-19 World Championship, and the Flag Football World Championship. The IFAF also organizes the annual International Bowl game.[175] The IFAF has received provisional recognition from the International Olympic Committee (IOC).[176] Several major obstacles hinder the IFAF goal of achieving status as an Olympic sport. These include the predominant participation of men in international play and the short three-week Olympic schedule. Large team sizes are an additional difficulty, due to the Olympics' set limit of 10,500 athletes and coaches. American football also has an issue with a lack of global visibility. Nigel Melville, the CEO of USA Rugby, noted that "American football is recognized globally as a sport, but it's not played globally." To solve these concerns, major effort has been put into promoting flag football, a modified version of American football, at the international level.[159] Flag football has been shortlisted for appearance at the 2028 Summer Olympics, pending final approval by the International Olympic Committee.[177]

Popularity and cultural influence
United States
Main article: American football in the United States

The Boise State Broncos, the first football team to design a blue field
"Baseball is still called the national pastime, but football is by far the more popular sport in American society", according to ESPN.com's Sean McAdam.[178] In a 2014 poll conducted by Harris Interactive, professional football ranked as the most popular sport, and college football ranked third behind only professional football and baseball; 46% of participants ranked some form of the game as their favorite sport. Professional football has ranked as the most popular sport in the poll since 1985, when it surpassed baseball for the first time.[179] Professional football is most popular among those who live in the eastern United States and rural areas, while college football is most popular in the southern United States and among people with graduate and post-graduate degrees.[180] Football is also the most-played sport by high school and college athletes in the United States. As of 2022, the National Football Foundation reports nearly 1.04 million high-school athletes play the sport, with another 81,000 college athletes across both the NCAA and the NAIA;[4] in comparison, the second-most played sport, had around 920,000 participants in high school and 63,000 in college.[181]

The Super Bowl is the most popular single-day sporting event in the United States,[35] and is among the biggest club sporting events in the world in terms of TV viewership.[140] The NFL made approximately $12 billion in revenue in 2022.[182] Super Bowl games account for eight of the top ten most-watched broadcasts in American history; Super Bowl LVII, played on February 12, 2023, was watched by a record 115.1 million Americans,[183] and is second only to the Apollo 11 moon landing (125 million viewers).[184]

American football also plays a significant role in American culture. The day on which the Super Bowl is held is considered a de facto national holiday,[185] and in parts of the country like Texas, the sport has been compared to a religion.[186][187] Football is also linked to other holidays; New Year's Day is traditionally the date for several college football bowl games, including the Rose Bowl. However, if New Year's Day is on a Sunday, the bowl games are moved to another date so as not to conflict with the typical NFL Sunday schedule.[188] Thanksgiving football is another American tradition,[189] hosting many high school, college, and professional games.[190] Implicit rules such as playing through pain and sacrificing for the better of the team are promoted in football culture.[191]

Other countries
See also: American football in Japan and American football in the United Kingdom
Photograph of London's Wembley Stadium during the opening ceremony of the 2010 NFL International series showing the field and the stands filled with fans
Opening ceremony of the 2010 NFL International Series at London's Wembley Stadium

A 2012 football game between national teams of Finland and Sweden at Sonera Stadium (now Bolt Arena) in Helsinki
In Canada, the game has a significant following. According to a 2013 poll, 21% of respondents said they followed the NFL "very closely" or "fairly closely", making it the third-most followed league behind the National Hockey League (NHL) and Canadian Football League (CFL).[192] American football also has a long history in Mexico, which was introduced to the sport in 1896. It was the second-most popular sport in Mexico in the 1950s, with the game being particularly popular in colleges.[193] The Los Angeles Times notes the NFL claims over 16 million fans in Mexico, which places the country third behind the U.S. and Canada.[194] American football is played in Mexico both professionally and as part of the college sports system.[195] A professional league, the Liga de Fútbol Americano Profesional (LFA), was founded in 2016.[196]

Japan was introduced to the sport in 1934 by Paul Rusch, a teacher and Christian missionary who helped to establish football teams at three universities in Tokyo.[197] Play was halted during World War II by order of Emperor Hirohito, but the sport began growing in popularity again after the war.[198] As of 2010, there are more than 400 high school football teams in Japan, with over 15,000 participants, and over 100 teams play in the Kantoh Collegiate Football Association (KCFA).[197] The X-League is the largest American football league in Japan, and the largest American football league in the world to use a promotion-relegation system. Some teams in the X-League, like the Panasonic Impulse, are sponsored by corporations, and all Japanese players on these teams are employed by the corporation. The league operates in separate spring and fall seasons, with each team playing five games. The top eight teams make the playoffs, which are played in Tokyo Dome; the champion is determined by the Rice Bowl.[198]

Europe is a major target for the expansion of the game by football organizers. In the United Kingdom in the 1980s, the sport was popular, with the 1986 Super Bowl being watched by over four million people (about 1 out of every 14 Britons). Its popularity faded during the 1990s, coinciding with the establishment of the Premier League—top level of the English football league system. According to BBC America, there is a "social stigma" surrounding American football in the UK, with many Brits feeling the sport has no right to call itself "football" due to the lack of emphasis on kicking.[199] Nonetheless, the sport has retained a following in the United Kingdom; the NFL operates a media network in the country, and since 2007 has hosted the NFL International Series in London. Super Bowl viewership has also rebounded, with over 4.4 million Britons watching Super Bowl XLVI.[200] The sport is played in European countries like Switzerland, which has American football clubs in every major city,[201] and Germany, where the sport has around 45,000 registered amateur players.[195]

In Brazil, football is a growing sport. It was generally unknown there until the 1980s when a small group of players began playing on Copacabana Beach in Rio de Janeiro. The sport grew gradually with 700 amateur players registering within 20 years. Games were played on the beach with modified rules and without the traditional football equipment due to its lack of availability in Brazil. Eventually, a tournament, the Carioca championship, was founded, with the championship Carioca Bowl played to determine a league champion. The country saw its first full-pad game of football in October 2008.[202] According to The Rio Times, the sport is one of the fastest-growing sports in Brazil and is almost as commonly played as soccer on the beaches of Copacabana and Botafogo.[203]

Football in Brazil is governed by the Confederação Brasileira de Futebol Americano (CBFA), which had over 5,000 registered players as of November 2013. The sport's increase in popularity has been attributed to games aired on ESPN, which began airing in Brazil in 1992 with Portuguese commentary.[204] The popularity and "easy accessibility" of non-contact versions of the sport in Brazil has led to a rise in participation by female players.[203] According to ESPN, the American football audience in Brazil increased 800% between 2013 and 2016. The network, along with Esporte Interativo, airs games there on cable television. The NFL has expressed interest in having games in the country, and the Super Bowl has become a widely watched event in Brazil at bars and movie theaters.[205]

Further countries have also expressed interest in football to lesser degrees. The Arab world has expressed growing interest in American football, with many countries in the region being members of IFAF Asia. Jordan and the United Arab Emirates, which are not members of IFAF, have established their own domestic leagues. Egypt established two leagues for the sport, namely the Egyptian League of American Football and the Egyptian Federation of American Football, and Saudi Arabia hosts two teams based out of Jeddah and Yanbu respectively.[206][207] China has additionally been a target for the expansion of the sport, with the Mainland being the home of the Chinese National Football League as well as a growing audience of Super Bowl watchers. Three franchises are also based out of Hong Kong, which prior to the COVID-19 pandemic regularly played mainland teams. NFL games average 900,000 viewers in China, though the league has cited logistical challenges which would prevent teams from playing games akin to abroad games in European countries.[208]

Variations and related sports
See also: Canadian football, Arena football, and Flag football
Photograph of men playing flag football
Men playing a game of flag football at the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island
Canadian football, the predominant form of football in Canada, is closely related to American football—both sports developed from rugby and are considered to be the chief variants of gridiron football.[209] Although both games share a similar set of rules, there are several key rule differences: for example, in Canadian football the field measures 150 by 65 yards (137 by 59 m), including two 20-yard end zones (for a distance between goal lines of 110 yards),[210] teams have three downs instead of four, there are twelve players on each side instead of eleven,[211] fair catches are not allowed, and a rouge, worth a single point is scored if the offensive team kicks the ball out of the defense's end zone.[212] The Canadian Football League (CFL) is the major Canadian league and is the second-most popular sporting league in Canada, behind the National Hockey League.[212] The NFL and CFL had a formal working relationship from 1997 to 2006.[213] The CFL has a strategic partnership with two American football leagues, the German Football League (GFL) and the Liga de Futbol Americano Profesional (LFA).[214] The Canadian rules were developed separately from the American game.

Indoor football leagues constitute what The New York Times writer Mike Tanier described as the "most minor of minor leagues." Leagues are unstable, with franchises regularly moving from one league to another or merging with other teams, and teams or entire leagues dissolving completely; games are only attended by a small number of fans, and most players are semi-professional athletes. The Indoor Football League is an example of a prominent indoor league.[215] The Arena Football League, which was founded in 1987 and ceased operations in 2019, was one of the longest-lived indoor football leagues.[216] In 2004, the league was called "America's fifth major sport" by ESPN The Magazine.[217]

There are several non-contact variants of football, such as flag football.[218] In flag football the ball-carrier is not tackled; instead, defenders aim to pull a flag tied around the ball-carrier's waist.[219] Another variant, touch football, simply requires the ball-carrier to be touched to be considered downed. Depending on the rules used, a game of touch football may require the ball-carrier be touched with either one or two hands to be considered downed.[220]

The 2025 NFL Draft is just over two weeks away and quarterback Cam Ward is the heavy favorite to be picked first overall by the Tennessee Titans. That means the real intrigue starts with the Cleveland Browns, who are drafting second overall and have an interesting decision on their hands between Travis Hunter, Abdul Carter and Shedeur Sanders, among others.

Many NFL executives believe Hunter is the favorite to go second to the Browns. He has a chance to be a transcendent playmaker on both sides of the ball unlike anything the NFL has seen in a long time and Cleveland could desperately really use it.

The 2024 Browns threw the most interceptions (23) in the NFL and they intercepted the fewest passes (four). They were the first team in 69 years to rank dead last in the NFL (outright) in interceptions on both offense and defense. The last time it was done was in 1955 by the Pittsburgh Steelers.

The Browns' performance in the passing game on both sides of the ball last year was ... atrocious. 

Browns passing ranks last season

Offense	Defense
Yards per attempt

While a better quarterback would obviously attack the offensive problem head on, Cleveland may not like the options available at the No. 2 pick. The Browns could instead look to address two needs (wide receiver and cornerback) with one pick in Hunter, who recently shared he wants to play every snap in an NFL game on offense and defense. 

Hunter had 1,258 receiving yards and 15 touchdown catches last season and intercepted four passes on defense, as many as the entire Browns team did in 2024. 

Tom Brady championship mark tied, Bill Belichick title wins surpassed as NFL adds new twist to record book
The NFL will incorporate AAFC records and stats to the official record book

Tom Brady was the quarterback that had the most championships by any player in NFL history. That record is now -- officially -- tied with Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterback Otto Graham. 

The NFL announced at the league meetings that the statistics from the All-America Football Conference will be incorporated into the league's record books. The records were officially approved by the league's owners Tuesday. The AAFC existed from 1946 through 1949 as a direct competitor to the NFL before folding, producing the Cleveland Browns, Baltimore Colts, and San Francisco 49ers.

The Browns won all four of the AAFC championships between 1946 to 1949, which is where Brady's championship mark is tied with Graham. Now that the league recognizes these championships, the four titles Otto Graham won in Cleveland when they were in the AAFC adds to the three NFL championships he won with the Browns in 1950, 1954, and 1955 -- giving him seven titles. With the AAFC records official, the Browns won five straight titles between 1946 and 1950 -- four in the AAFC and one in the NFL.

Brady and Graham each played in 10 championship games, both going 7-3 in title games. While Brady still has the NFL record for most Super Bowls won (seven) and Super Bowl appearances as a player (10), he shares the all-time record with Graham for championships won and championship game appearances (the NFL started in 1920). 

With the merger of the AAFC records, which were somehow ignored by the NFL when it folded and the league took the teams that didn't disband, the most championships won by any coach in NFL history now belongs to Browns head coach Paul Brown. 

Brown now has seven championships in the NFL record books instead of three, thanks to the NFL announcing the merger of the AAFC records. With seven championships, Brown surpasses Bill Belichick, George Halas, and Curly Lambeau for the most championships in NFL history. Belichick, Halas, and Lambeau each won six titles. 

Belichick has the most Super Bowl titles for a head coach with six, but Brown has passed him for the all-time mark. Brown is officially seventh on the all-time wins list for head coaches with 213, as his 49 AAFC regular season victories were added (he was previously 21st with 164).

Here's another caveat to the league record books with AAFC records intact. The 1972 Miami Dolphins have company with the perfect season, as the 1948 Browns went 14-0-0 in the AAFC. These are the only two teams recognized by the league as having a perfect regular season and postseason (undefeated and untied). 

The Dolphins are still the only team to go undefeated and untied in an NFL season, but the Browns perfect season in the AAFC is part of the NFL record books as well.

The league incorporated the AFL records when the two leagues officially merged at the conclusion of the 1969 season. They are finally doing the same with the AAFC. 

Aaron Rodgers reached out to this NFL team about playing in 2025, but Steelers still look like best option
The four-time MVP actually reached out to a team about playing this year

For the first time this offseason, Aaron Rodgers answered some questions about his future and what we learned this week is that the four-time MVP still hasn't made any decisions about what he's going to do in 2025. 

Although Rodgers is still a free agent, he might be in Minnesota right now if the Vikings had decided to sign him. At the NFL owner's meeting in late March, Vikings coach Kevin O'Connell mentioned that Rodgers reached out, so it seems pretty clear that the one-time Super Bowl winner called the Vikings -- and not the other way around -- which suggests that he was highly interested in playing for Minnesota. 

"He happened to be at a point in time in his career where he was free to have some real dialogue about what his future may look like. And we happened to be one of those teams that he reached out to," O'Connell said, via ESPN. 

Albert Breer of Sports Illustrated added some more context to this story this week. In Breer's report, he mentioned the fact that Rodgers pitched the Vikings on the idea of "making a one-year run at a Lombardi" while also "being a willing mentor for J.J. McCarthy."

During his interview with Pat McAfee on Thursday, Rodgers didn't necessarily dispute the report, but he did make it clear that he hasn't been sitting around waiting for the Vikings to possibly sign him. 

"There are a lot of narratives that haven't been anywhere near accurate, starting with the Jets and continuing with something I just read about me pitching something to the Vikings," Rodgers told McAfee. "I only know this because Ben [Roethlisberger] was on the show talking about me waiting around for the Vikings. That's not accurate."

During the April 1 edition of his podcast, Roethlisberger theorized that Rodgers was still unsigned because he was waiting on the Vikings. Rodgers certainly disputed that notion, but he didn't directly dispute the report from Breer. 

If Rodgers did approach the Vikings with a pitch of him winning a Super Bowl in Minnesota, it would have been easy for him to do it and that's because he's friends with O'Connell. 

"I've known Kevin forever," Rodgers said. "We used to work out together at Fitness Quest 10 in San Diego county. I've known him for 17, 18 years. We've got a good friendship, so we talk outside of just this offseason. We keep in touch during the season, so we've had good communication."

Although the Vikings showed interest in Rodgers, they decided in mid-March that they weren't going to pursue the 10-time Pro Bowler and that they were going to move forward with McCarthy. 

If Rodgers had his eyes set on signing with Minnesota, it's possible he doesn't feel as strongly about signing with the Steelers (or any other team), which is why he hasn't been in any rush to make a decision. Rodgers also hasn't been in a rush to pick a team because he's been focused on his personal life. 

"I have a lot of things that are taking my attention -- and have, beginning in January -- away from football," Rodgers said. "That's where I've been focusing most of my attention on. Making a commitment to a team is a big thing."

 
Aaron Rodgers breaks silence: QB sounds off on ugly Jets exit, Steelers plans, willingness to play for $10M
Cody Benjamin
Aaron Rodgers breaks silence: QB sounds off on ugly Jets exit, Steelers plans, willingness to play for $10M
Rodgers clearly gave a lot of thought to what life would be like with the Vikings, because he made it clear that he understood the optics of what it would look like for a former Packers QB to end up in Minnesota, which is the path that Brett Favre once took. 

Consensus 2025 NFL mock draft: Shedeur Sanders slips but still manages to be a top-10 pick
Here's how the experts have the first round playing out

"I know there's, I'm sure, a lot of sentiment from Packers fans and shit, maybe even Vikings fans about certain things," Rodgers said. 

At this point, the Steelers still feel like the favorite in the clubhouse, but with Rodgers, you just never know what's going to happen. In the end, he might not sign with anyone and he might just ride off into the Malibu sunset. 

"I'm open to anything and attached to nothing," Rodgers said. "So yeah, retirement could still be a possibility."

At 41, Rodgers is facing his football mortality: The 2025 season could be the final one of his career, so it certainly makes some sense that he wants to think long and hard about what he wants to do this year. 

There are plenty of questions to be answered about the 2025 NFL Draft's first round with less than a week to go. 

Will the Titans trade out of the No. 1 overall pick, or will they use it to select quarterback Cam Ward? Will the Browns and Giants -- respective holders of the No. 2 and No. 3 overall picks -- select either Shedeur Sanders, receiver/cornerback Travis Hunter or Penn State pass rusher Abdul Carter? Will the Bears trade up from the 10th overall pick? These are just a few of the questions that remain mysteries with the draft slated to kick off on April 24. 

To gain some clarity, we decided to take a look at 12 mock drafts from analysts at CBS Sports, ESPN and NFL.com. We then created our own mock draft, listing each player who was mocked the most times at each specific spot in the first round. While some of the results were somewhat predictable, there were more than a few surprises. 

Here's a look at which positions were selected most in the first round. 
Let's take a look at our consensus mock draft, with the real draft taking place from Lambeau Field in Green Bay, Wisconsin.

Mock Draft
2025 NFL Consensus Mock Draft Round 1, Pick 1 Cam Ward QB Miami
A pretty unanimous choice, Ward is expected to be the first player selected in this year's draft. The top-ranked QB prospect in the draft, Ward's 39 TD passes in 2024 led the ACC. Round 1, Pick 2 Travis Hunter ATH Colorado • Jr • 6'0" / 188 lbs
Abdul Carter got some consideration, but the majority of mocks have the Browns taking Hunter, who dominated on both sides of the ball during his final season at Colorado. Expect Kevin Stefanski to find numerous ways to get Hunter involved in the Browns offense. Round 1, Pick 3
Abdul Carter EDGE Penn State • Jr • 6'3" / 250 lbs
The general thinking is that the Giants will select Carter if Hunter is taken by the Browns. There was also some who feel that the Giants could select Ashton Jeanty to help bolster their offense. The one thing just about everyone agrees on is that Big Blue won't be using this pick on a QB. Round 1, Pick 4
Just about every mock has the Patriots taking Campbell, which makes sense given New England's needs on the offensive line. During his time at LSU, Campbell had a 24-game streak without allowing a sack, a stat that is surely music to Drake Maye's ears. Round 1, Pick 5 Mason Graham DL Michigan 
A game wrecker at Michigan, Graham is expected to be drafted by a Jaguars team that needs defensive reinforcements after finishing at or near the bottom in the league in several categories last season. Round 1, Pick 6 Ashton Jeanty RB Boise State 
After having Marshawn Lynch in Seattle, Pete Carroll begins his Raiders tenure by drafting the top RB prospect in Jeanty, who if drafted by Las Vegas will look to follow in the footsteps of former Raider RB greats Marcus Allen, Bo Jackson and Josh Jacobs.
Round 1, Pick 7 Armand Membou OT Missouri • Jr • 6'4" / 332 lbs
The Jets need to protect Justin Fields better than they protected Aaron Rodgers, which is why many feel that Gang Green will select Membou, who was a driving force for the Tigers' high-scoring offense. 
Of the first eight picks, this one was the most divided as there is no consensus on what Carolina will do with this pick. Multiple mocks, however, do have the Panthers taking Walker, the 2024 recipient of the Butkus Award that is given annually to the nation's top linebacker.

Tom Brady News: Retired Football Star to Broadcast Super Bowl LIX
Tom Brady played in 10 Super Bowls during his NFL career, but the February 9 game between the Philadelphia Eagles and Kansas City Chiefs will offer a new perspective. ﻿The 47-year-old is making his bowl debut as a broadcaster, serving as color commentator with Kevin Burkhardt for Fox Sports, the big game’s TV host. Brady joined the network’s coverage this season as part of a 10-year, $375 million deal.
During a recent media conference call ﻿ahead of Super Bowl LIX﻿, the three-time NFL MVP﻿ reflected on his first year in the booth and the learning curve he’s faced. ﻿“I love the ability to take the viewer inside of just the way that I see things. In some ways, it’s very simple. In some ways, it’s very complicated,” he said. “I feel as a crew, we’re all hitting our stride. We know each other better every week. Hopefully, this is our best game yet.”﻿
Brady has more access to prepare for the Super Bowl compared to games earlier in the season. Because of his ownership stake in the Las Vegas Raiders, he previously hasn’t been allowed to attend team facilities for production meetings or criticize officials during games. However, those restrictions have been partially lifted﻿ for the championship.
Retired football player Tom Brady is widely considered one of the best quarterbacks in NFL history. He won a record seven Super Bowl championships as well as three NFL MVP awards and five Super Bowl MVP awards during his career. Drafted by the New England Patriots in 2000, Brady’s 20 seasons with the team included a high-profile suspension following the 2015 “Deflategate” scandal, in which footballs were illegally deflated before a vital playoff game. The quarterback then spent two seasons playing for the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who he similarly led to Super Bowl victory. Brady retired in February 2023 and is now ﻿a TV analyst for Fox Sports.﻿ He was previously married to supermodel Gisele Bündchen, though the couple divorced in 2022.﻿
Thomas Edward Patrick Brady Jr. was born on August 3, 1977, in San Mateo, California; Brady excelled at both football and baseball at Junipero Serra High School. After graduating in 1995, he passed up a chance to play professional baseball to attend the University of Michigan.
Although a member of the school’s football team, Brady didn’t spend much time on the field in his first two college seasons. In his junior year, however, he served as Michigan’s starting quarterback. That season, Brady threw 350 passes for 2,636 yards. He helped lead his team to an Orange Bowl victory in his final season.
Moving on to the NFL, Brady was drafted by the New England Patriots in the sixth round of the 2000 NFL draft. Initially, he served as a backup quarterback and played only one game during his first season.

The 2001 season was different: After starting quarterback Drew Bledsoe was injured, Brady took over, proving himself a strong leader with a mighty arm. Anyone who doubted his abilities only had to look at the team’s record, an impressive 11 wins to 3 losses in the 14 games that Brady started. In the postseason, he helped the team secure a win over the St. Louis Rams at Super Bowl XXXVI, and Brady received the game’s MVP award.

Two years later, Brady led his team to another win at Super Bowl XXXVIII against the Carolina Panthers, for which he earned a second Super Bowl MVP award. And in the 2004 season, Brady again led the team to Super Bowl success, taking down the Philadelphia Eagles 24-21.

In 2005, Brady signed a new six-year contract with the Patriots, and for the 2006 season, the team had a 12-4 record in the regular season.

Near-Undefeated Season and Injury
With star wide receiver Randy Moss in the fold, the Patriots developed one of the most explosive offenses in NFL history in 2007. Brady passed for a then-record 50 touchdowns to pick up his first MVP award, and the Patriots ran roughshod over the rest of the league en route to an undefeated regular season before suffering a gut-wrenching loss to the New York Giants at Super Bowl XLII.

During the first game of the 2008 season, Brady was quickly sidelined with a knee injury. He had several surgeries and extensive rehabilitation to repair the damage, forcing him to sit out the entire season. While some wondered whether the injury would be a career-ender, Brady returned to prove the doubters wrong. He signed a new contract with the team in 2010.

In the 2011 season, Brady pulled out all the stops, helping the team secure their place at Super Bowl XLVI. The Patriots once again battled the New York Giants in football’s ultimate game. Before the big event, Brady’s then-wife, model Gisele Bündchen, emailed friends and family. She asked them to pray for Brady and to “envision him happy and fulfilled, experiencing with his team a victory.” Unfortunately, these prayers went unanswered as the Giants beat the Patriots 21-17.

Despite missing the first four games of the 2016 season, Brady helped the Patriots clinch another spot in the Super Bowl, defeating the Pittsburgh Steelers in the playoffs. Before the championship game, Brady told reporters that he wanted to win the game for his mother, who was suffering from an undisclosed illness. “She’s the one I want to win for,” Brady said.

With his mother in attendance at the NRG Stadium in Houston and millions of fans watching, Brady did not disappoint. In a thrilling game, the first that went into overtime in NFL history, Brady led the Patriots to a 34-28 victory over the Atlanta Falcons. With this historic win, Brady became the first quarterback in NFL history to take home five Super Bowl rings. He surpassed quarterbacks Joe Montana, one of his idols, and Terry Bradshaw, who both have four Super Bowl wins. He also was awarded his fourth Super Bowl MVP for leading a 25-point comeback and throwing a Super Bowl-record 466 passing yards. Super Bowl LI marked Brady’s seventh appearance in the big game, and it was also an NFL record.

In February 2022, Brady announced his retirement after 22 seasons. “I have loved my NFL career, and now it is time to focus my time and energy on other things that require my attention,” he said in a post to Instagram. However, the following month, Brady shocked everyone by announcing he would, in fact, return for one more season with Tampa Bay.

Although the Bucs were inconsistent from week to week, finishing with a losing record of 8-9, they won the NFC South division and advanced to the playoffs. However, the team lost in the wild-card round to the Dallas Cowboys. ﻿Brady retired again as a player, this time for good, in February 2023.

However, he is far from done with the NFL. In fall 2024, Brady began a lucrative 10-year TV deal as a color commentator for Fox Sports. He has likened announcing to﻿ his former on-field position: “I still get to be a quarterback. It’s a little bit different, but in the end, you’re sitting in that hot seat and you’re the one calling the shots. That’s where I like to be and where I’m most comfortable.” Brady also purchased a minority stake in the Las Vegas Raiders in October 2024.

Jerry Rice is widely considered to be the greatest wide receiver in the history of the National Football League (NFL). While in college, he earned All-America honors and set 18 Division I-AA records. The San Francisco 49ers drafted Rice in the first round in 1985, the start of a 20-year career in which Rice won multiple Super Bowls and set 38 NFL records. Rice was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2010.

Early Career
Jerry Lee Rice was born on October 13, 1962, in Starkville, Mississippi. One of eight children, he was the son of a hardworking bricklayer who employed Rice and his brothers as his assistants during the hot Southern summers. It was grueling work, but Rice later came to be grateful for it. "It taught me the meaning of hard work," he said.

Early on, Rice proved himself to be a gifted runner, often cutting back and forth on the long dirt road that ran in front of his house. But it wasn't until high school that Rice discovered football. As the story goes, Rice had skipped classes one day and ran into an assistant principal. After sprinting away from him, Rice was eventually reprimanded. But his quickness was soon brought to the attention of the school's football coach, who put him in pads and had him line up as a receiver.

Rice quickly caught on to the game and became an offensive threat for the team. His talent was enough to catch the eyes of a few college scouts, and in the fall of 1981, he enrolled at Mississippi Valley State University.

Playing in the lowly regarded Southwestern Athletic Conference and on a team that often used a spread-the-field offensive attack, Rice's impressive offensive numbers were looked at skeptically by pro scouts. Still, it was impossible not to at least label him an intriguing prospect. Over his four-year college career, Rice hauled in 4,692 receiving yards and collected 18 Division I-AA records.
In the 1985 NFL draft, the San Francisco 49ers selected Rice with the 16th overall pick. That rookie season was an up-and-down year for Rice, who started off slow but gained momentum later in the year.

"I was thinking through every step of a complicated offense," he later admitted.

His second year was his breakout season. Teamed with veteran quarterback Joe Montana, Rice snagged 86 catches, including 15 touchdowns, and 1,570 receiving yards.

Rice followed it up with an even better season in 1987, earning Player of the Year honors and setting a new league record with 23 touchdowns. In the 1988-1989 season, he led the 49ers to the Super Bowl, where he caught 11 passes and was named the game's MVP.

Famous for his fitness level, Rice went on to play an unprecedented 20 NFL seasons, finally retiring in 2004. The majority of his career was played in a 49ers uniform, but he later caught passes for the Oakland Raiders and Seattle Seahawks.
Retirement
Without a doubt the most prolific receiver in the NFL history, Rice retired with 38 NFL records to his name, including most career receptions (1,549), receiving yards (22,895) and touchdowns (197). Rice was named a member of the NFL's All-Decade Teams of the 1980s and 1990s as well as the league's 75th Anniversary Team.

"I've pushed my body for 20 years," Rice said at the press conference announcing his retirement. "I was never a couch potato, I was always working out. I had to prove myself every year."

In 2010, Rice, who won three Super Bowl rings with the 49ers, was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame.

Joe Montana was selected late in the third round of the 1979 draft by San Francisco 49ers coach Bill Walsh and went on to lead the 49ers to victories in four Super Bowls, including consecutive wins in 1989 and 1990. He joined the Kansas City Chiefs in 1993 before retiring. He was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2000.

At one point a seventh-string quarterback for the Fighting Irish, Montana eventually took over the starting job and led the team to the 1977 national championship. After fighting off the flu to spark a comeback win over the University of Houston at the 1979 Cotton Bowl, he was selected in the third round of that year's National Football League draft by the San Francisco 49ers.

Pro Football Career
Installed as a starter toward the end of his second season, Montana proved an accurate quarterback with an ability to scramble to keep plays alive and remain calm in important moments. The signature play of his early career came at the end of the 1981 NFC Championship Game when he lofted a pass to a leaping Dwight Clark in the back of the end zone for the winning score. Two weeks later, he was named MVP of San Francisco's 26-21 win over the Cincinnati Bengals in Super Bowl XVI.
With Montana and wide receiver Jerry Rice spearheading coach Bill Walsh's West Coast offense, the 49ers became the dominant NFL team of the 1980s. They claimed seven NFC West titles during the decade and won Super Bowls XIX, XXIII and XXIV, with Montana earning game MVP honors in two of those victories. Most famously, "Joe Cool" shrugged off the mounting pressure of a fourth-quarter deficit against the Bengals in his third Super Bowl, driving his offense 92 yards for the winning touchdown with less than a minute to play.
Montana guided the 49ers to a 14-2 record in 1990, but he was knocked out of the team's loss to the New York Giants in the NFC Championship Game, and injuries kept him out for nearly all of the following two seasons. By the time he was fully healthy, the 49ers had talented quarterback Steve Young already in place and were ready to cut ties with the player who had carried the team to its greatest heights. In April 1993, they traded Montana to the Kansas City Chiefs.
The veteran quarterback showed he still had the golden touch by leading the Chiefs to their first division title in 22 years and the 1993 AFC Championship Game. After one more solid season, which ended with a loss to the Miami Dolphins in a 1994 Wild Card playoff game, Montana announced his retirement. Over the course of his career, the four-time Super Bowl champion was twice named the Associated Press MVP and earned eight Pro Bowl selections. In addition, he retired with NFL playoff records for completions, yards and touchdowns.
Post-Football- Montana was easily inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2000, his first year of eligibility. Arguably the best quarterback in history, he ranked fourth in a list of the game's all-time top 100 players compiled by the NFL Network in 2010.
The football legend mainly kept a low profile after leaving the game. A food and wine aficionado, he owned an estate in Northern California wine country for several years, an area that offered plenty of trails for horseriding.
Personal Life- Montana and his wife, Jennifer, have four children: Alexandra, Elizabeth, Nathaniel and Nicholas. The youngest two both played football for Division I collegiate programs.

Patrick Mahomes News: Quarterback Completes 2024 Super Bowl Comeback with Third MVP Award
Patrick Mahomes still needs four more Super Bowl wins to tie Tom Brady’s record of seven. But the Kansas City Chiefs quarterback is a little closer to the NFL great in one aspect. Mahomes was named the MVP of Super Bowl LVIII on February 11 after throwing for 333 yards and tossing the winning touchdown to Mecole Hardman in overtime, completing a 25-22 comeback win over the San Francisco 49ers.

With his third MVP honor—Mahomes also earned the title in Kansas City’s 2020 and 2023 Bowl wins—the 28-year-old QB is one of only three players to accomplish the feat. Joe Montana and Brady, with five total, are the others. The Chiefs are the first team to repeat as Super Bowl champions since, you guessed it, the Patriots with Brady in 2003 and 2004.

Mahomes acknowledged the Brady comparisons and said they help fuel his ambitions. “It’s always going to be tough because Brady beat me in the Super Bowl [in 2021]. That’s one thing he’ll always have on my head,” Mahomes told NFL Network after the game Sunday. “It gives me something to strive for every single day is chasing greatness, and whenever I’m tired, I might not want to work out, I know that I have to do it to be in these moments like this... It does give me that added motivation to continue to be great every single day.”
Who Is Patrick Mahomes?
Football player Patrick Mahomes has won three Super Bowls as quarterback of the Kansas City Chiefs, earning the game’s MVP award in each instance. The son of former MLB pitcher Pat Mahomes Sr., Patrick played baseball in college and almost went pro. But his success on the football field at Texas Tech University changed his plans. Mahomes was drafted into the NFL in 2017 as the 10th overall pick and has since won two league MVP awards. Currently, he is the second-highest-paid player in the NFL.
Patrick Lavon Mahomes II was born September 17, 1995, in Tyler, Texas.

His parents are former MLB pitcher Patrick “Pat” Mahomes Sr., who played professionally for 11 years, and event planner Randi Martin Mahomes. The younger Mahomes, who is biracial, has said he’s both “proud to be Black” and “proud to have a white mom, too.” Pat and Randi are now divorced, though they remain “friendly.”

Mahomes has one brother, Jackson, and three half-siblings: sisters Mia and Zoe, along with brother Graham. Today, Jackson is a social media star with over 1.1 million followers on TikTok and is known for posting videos from many of Patrick’s games. However, he is also a controversial figure. Most notably, he was arrested in May 2023 and charged with three counts of aggravated sexual battery and a fourth charge of misdemeanor battery stemming from an incident at a restaurant in Overland Park, Kansas, in February 2023. The three felony charges were dropped in January 2024, while Jackson has pleaded not guilty to the misdemeanor.

Before either Mahomes brother found fame, they followed their father’s star. With Pat playing for several MLB teams throughout his career, the family often lived in apartments and hotel rooms in cities where he played. Patrick was athletically gifted like his father. He excelled at baseball and also played football.

By his junior year, Mahomes was starting at quarterback at Whitehouse High School in Whitehouse, Texas. In his senior year, he threw for 4,600 yards, 50 touchdowns, and only four interceptions, but college coaches still thought his future was in baseball.

College- After high school, the Detroit Tigers drafted Mahomes in the 37th round. Declining the offer, Mahomes enrolled at Texas Tech University in 2014

The Kansas City Chiefs drafted Mahomes as the 10th overall pick in the first round of the 2017 NFL draft. Mahomes made his professional football debut and first start against the Denver Broncos that December.

In 2018, he became just the second quarterback in NFL history to throw for 50 touchdowns and 5,000 passing yards in a single season and was named the NFL’s MVP. Leading the team to a 12-4 record, Mahomes was the first Chiefs player to win a league MVP award.
Mahomes and the Chiefs earned a spot in the NFL championship for a second year running in 2021. However, they lost Super Bowl LV to Tom Brady and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, 31-9.

After missing out on a third consecutive Super Bowl berth, Mahomes returned in February 2023. The Chiefs beat the Philadelphia Eagles 38-35 to secure the quarterback’s second Super Bowl victory and third for the franchise. Mahomes was awarded the Super Bowl MVP for the second time.
In the 2023 regular season, Mahomes threw for 4,183 yards and 27 touchdowns. Leading the Chiefs to playoff wins over the Miami Dolphins, Buffalo Bills, and Baltimore Ravens, the quarterback sent the team to its fourth Super Bowl in five years. Mahomes led Kansas City to a second-half comeback and threw the winning touchdown pass in overtime for a 25-22 victory over the 49ers in Super Bowl LVIII. He was again named the game’s MVP.
Mahomes was one of three NFL quarterbacks—along with Marcus Mariota and Kirk Cousins—featured in the docuseries Quarterback, which premiered on Netflix in July 2023.
With NFL great Peyton Manning as an executive producer, the series followed Mahomes throughout the 2022 NFL season and gave viewers a behind-the-scenes look at his practice habits and life away from the field with his wife, Brittany, and their family. “Everybody sees the game days, but they don’t see the day-to-day grind,” Mahomes said. “They don’t see how you have to manage playing football and being a dad and being a husband.”
Jim Brown was a former All-American athlete who played for the Cleveland Browns as a star running back, setting records and earning election to the Pro Football Hall of Fame. He retired in 1966 to pursue an acting career, landing roles in films like The Dirty Dozen, Ice Station Zebra, and Kenner. He was also a prominent civil rights figure during the 1960s and dedicated to Black business empowerment. He died in May 2023 at age 87.

Early Years and Education- Born on February 17, 1936, on St. Simons Island, off the southern coast of Georgia, James Nathaniel Brown experienced a childhood shaped by struggle. He was just two weeks old when his father abandoned the family. His mother soon departed from his life as well, taking a job as a maid in Manhasset, New York, and leaving the care of her young son in the hands of Brown’s great-grandmother.
Brown was 8 years old when his mother finally sent for him to come live with her in New York. In his new home, Brown did well, thriving on the football field for the largely white Manhasset High School. During his senior year, the young running back averaged an astonishing 14.9 yards per carry, more than good enough to earn him a spot at Syracuse University.
In college in the mid-1950s, Brown dominated the competition on the football field. He also ran track and was a talented lacrosse player.
As a running back, Brown earned national attention for his strong, explosive play. In the final regular-season game of his senior year, Brown capped off his college career by rushing for 197 yards, scoring six touchdowns, and kicking seven extra points.
Pro Career and Stats- In 1957, the Cleveland Browns selected Brown with the sixth overall pick in the NFL draft. Brown wasted little time adjusting to the new competition, leading the league in rushing yards with 942 on his way to capturing NFL Rookie of the Year honors.
Over the next seven seasons, Brown became the standard-bearer for all NFL running backs. At a time when defenses were geared toward stopping the ground game, Brown bulldozed his way past the opposition, posting remarkable season totals

In the late 1980s, he started the Amer-I-Can program, which aimed to turn the lives around of young gang members. He became fiercely critical of superstar Black athletes of the time, such as Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson, for not being better role models.
But trouble also followed the temperamental Brown. In 1968, he was accused of throwing his then-girlfriend off a second-story balcony. The following year, he managed to escape charges that alleged he assaulted another man following a traffic accident. More recently, in 1999, Brown was convicted of smashing the window of his wife’s car. After refusing to attend counseling, Brown served a six-month jail sentence in 2002.
Later Years and Honors
Brown served as executive adviser to the Browns from 2005 to 2010 and later was named special adviser to his old club. In 2016, he was honored with a statue outside Cleveland’s FirstEnergy Stadium.
In 2002, Brown was named the greatest football player of all time by The Sporting News. In January 2020, during halftime of the college football national championship game, he was recognized as the top college football player ever.

The Women's Professional American Football League (WPFL) was a women's professional American football league in the United States, It was founded in 1965 by talent agent Sid Friedman, for exhibition games. It started with four teams:

The Cleveland Daredevils of Cleveland, Ohio,
The Pittsburgh All-Stars of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania (later renamed the Hurricanes and then the Powderkegs)
The Canadian Belles of Toronto, Ontario
and the Detroit Petticoats of Detroit, Michigan.
Among the WPFL best players can be named Marcella Sanborn (from The Daredevils) and Carole Duffy and Linda Rae Hodge (from the Powderkegs). The WPFL ceased operations in 1973. The WPFL operated again between 1999 and 2007 as a fall league and not a spring league with its first game in 1999. The teams in the league were:
Lake Michigan Minx
Southern California Breakers[5]
Independent Women's Football League
Main article: Independent Women's Football League
Independent Women's Football League (IWFL) was the first Women's American football league established by women players for women players. The league was founded in 2000, began play in 2001, and played its last season in 2018. The players were amateur/semi pro and had to cover part of their expenses.[6] Among its teams can be named the Southern California Breakers,[7] and the Austin Outlaws.
Women's American Football League
The Women's American Football League was a women's American football league that was formed in 2001. After disbanding, the teams merged with the Women's Affiliated Football Conference (WAFC), the Independent Women's Football League (IWFL), Women's Football Association (WFA), and the American Football Women's League (AFWL).[8]
American Football Women's League
The American Football Women's League (AFWL) which debuted on May 15, 2002, was one of the first women's football leagues formed, originally using the name WAFL, or Women's American Football League in 2001. The AFWL officially disbanded in March 2003, due to money and attendance problems.[9]
Women's Football Association (2002–03)
The Women's Football Association was a women's American football league formed in 2002 and which folded in 2003. Many of the league's members had been part of the Women's American Football League. It's teams were: Birmingham Steel Magnolias, Georgia Enforcers, Indianapolis Vipers, New Orleans Voodoo Dolls, Carolina Crusaders, Jacksonville Dixie Blues, Orlando Fire, and Tampa Bay Force.[10]

If football is so deadly, why did 103 million people watch the Super Bowl?
During the second quarter of Super Bowl LII, the party stopped, if just for a second.
Tom Brady found Patriots wide receiver Brandin Cooks downfield with a 23-yard completion. Cooks spun around then got laid out by the Eagles’ Malcolm Jenkins, who was going full speed, leading with his shoulder.
Right in the middle of football’s biggest game, there it was: another reminder of the NFL’s concussion crisis. NBC commentators Cris Collinsworth and Al Michaels seemed to struggle with the fact that the play was legal.
That’s where we are these days. No one knew quite what to say as Cooks looked like he had been knocked out by an absolutely routine part of the game, which sidelined him for the night.
For all that, I doubt the uncomfortable few minutes while he was treated on the field – viewers had no idea how badly he was hurt – caused more than a few fans to turn away. Based on my experience as a sports editor, my hunch is most of the tens of millions who watched had already come to terms with the game’s violence.
Americans still (mostly) love football
There are two reasons why football won’t go out of existence, despite a consistent flow of head injuries.
The first is popularity and the financial strength it yields.
While Super Bowl ratings were down, Philadelphia’s thrilling 41-33 upset of New England still drew 103.4 million American viewers. That makes it the 10th most watched event in television history, behind eight other Super Bowls and the final episode of “M.A.S.H.”
Not only that, the NFL dominates TV ratings all year. Little wonder league revenue has almost doubled this decade, to roughly $14 billion. The NFL is shooting for $25 billion by 2027.
That leads to the second point.
The implication of that Newsweek headline is an argument that goes like this: “If fans only understood the dangers of concussions, they would turn against football, as they did against smoking or drunk driving.”
But the issue is not about awareness. The New York Times reported powerfully on it as early as 2007, and a Frontline documentary in 2013 sparked a national discussion. While there is definite concern, as polling data show, most fans haven’t been ready to pull the plug – at least not for that reason.
It’s the same for players. The Associated Press interviewed 100 a couple of seasons ago and found only 39 were more worried about the long-term effects of concussions than other injuries.
Maybe it’s this simple: We’ve always known football was risky, and now we know more about what that means. But if everyone knows the risks involved, then everyone should be free to do and watch what they like. There are other examples of sports and activities in a similar vein – motor racing, hockey and boxing, to name a few.
Behind the decline
Still, the NFL has undeniably suffered a ratings decline.
There are several reasons for this, from the erosion of cable television, to controversies such as what constitutes a catch, to the National Anthem protests that prompted the president to attack the NFL. I asked a class of 15 students recently if they knew someone who stopped watching because of players taking a knee. Five raised their hands, something confirmed by national surveys.
The bottom line: Head injuries don’t appear to be behind the ratings drop. And it could reverse in an instant, perhaps by a Supreme Court decision legalizing sports betting. That’s all it might take to boost fan interest and the league’s bottom line – with $25 billion around the corner.

If you haven’t heard by now, the star quarterback for the San Francisco 49ers, Colin Kaepernick, refused to stand for the national anthem over the weekend.
This wasn’t the first time, and he plans to continue until conditions for people of color improve:
“I’ll continue to sit. I’m going to continue to stand with the people that are being oppressed.… When there’s significant change and I feel like that flag represents what it’s supposed to represent…I’ll stand.”
His has already been a controversial tenure as successor to Hall of Fame quarterbacks Joe Montana and Steve Young as the face of one of the most successful franchises in NFL history. He doesn’t fit the mold.
For starters, he’s black. (OK, biracial. But in America, he’s considered black.) Further, after achieving some success, reaching a Super Bowl a few years ago, and two consecutive conference championship games, his play has been bereft of consistency lately. He may lose his starting job to Blaine Gabbert – someone who, on his best day, is average by NFL standards. To top it all off, he now plays for a coach, Chip Kelly, who’s been accused of racism.
This is what makes his stand so amazing. With millions of dollars at risk, he took a principled stand, one that quite literally may cost him dearly. Yes, he’s willing to sacrifice, something that’s the essence of patriotism. More on that later.
Taking a stand by refusing to stand
After observing the continued oppression of people of color in the United States, a country in which “freedom and justice and justice for all is stressed,” the quarterback decided to take action. He wants America to honor its promise to all Americans, not just the ones who are white. He says he will stand for the national anthem once things improve: when the country realizes the principles represented by the flag.
Of course, this isn’t the first time a famous athlete has taken a public stand on the gap between American values and social practices in the U.S. The late, great Muhammad Ali, at great personal sacrifice, refused to serve in the U.S. military because, as he stated:
“[the Vietcong] never called me nigger, they never lynched me, they didn’t put no dogs on me, they didn’t rob me of my nationality, rape and kill my mother and father.”
Ali was subsequently stripped of his championship belts, and was banned from making a living during the prime of his boxing career.
Likewise in 1968, a time during which the country was polarized over race, two track stars added fuel to the fire. During the Olympics of that year, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, each of whom won medals in the 200-meter race, each raised a black-gloved fist on the podium as the national anthem was played. It was a means of protesting continuing injustice in the U.S.
They, too, sacrificed, as they both experienced financial hardship resulting from their actions.
Why the quarterback’s critics are wrong
So how did America react to Kaepernick’s one-man protest?
Let’s begin with the less thoughtful comments. As soon as the news broke, I knew it’d be just a matter of time before the word “nigger” would start flying in the quarterback’s direction.
My priors were confirmed. Here is some of the immediate reaction on Twitter.
These folk are easily dismissed on the grounds that intolerance of any kind is inconsistent with American values, of which tolerance is one.
These people undermine themselves.
Others, like blogger Ethan Ralph, have leveled another criticism, one ultimately rooted in class, that goes something like this. America’s been good to him: He’s rich, after all! Since America’s been so good to him, the argument continues, he has no reason to criticize it.
Wrong.
First, such people don’t consider his life story, including whether he’s ever been victimized by prejudice. He has. This feeling doesn’t disappear when one “makes it.” Second, real patriots are required to care about one’s countrymen – regardless of one’s station in life.
Another set of critics, including former teammates, claim that the quarterback is disrespecting the military when he fails to stand for the anthem.
Wrong again.
The critics swing and miss on this big time. The military fights to protect American values and beliefs. Protest and dissent are “as American as apple pie.” In fact, America is founded on dissent and protest. In short, if these people have an issue with the quarterback, they should also be pissed off with the likes of George Washington, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson.
Why the quarterback is right
Ultimately, American patriotism is about a commitment to the values on which a country is founded: freedom, equality and tolerance, among others, absent interference from others. But patriotism doesn’t end with commitment. It also entails the willingness to sacrifice one’s self-interest for the common good, so that the American dream is available to all.
Washington and his colleagues were so committed to the idea of America, they were willing to sacrifice their lives so that the rest of the colonists could pursue their dreams – well, the white ones, anyway.
Likewise, in the 1960s. Ali, as well as Smith and Carlos, were so committed to social justice that each did irreparable harm to their respective abilities to earn a living.
Colin Kaepernick is no different. In his fight for social justice, he’s willing to sacrifice millions in salary and endorsements, and perhaps even his career, to make life better for his fellow Americans.
So, who’s the real patriot: the quarterback, or his critics?
Just one more preseason game for Jarryd Hayne this weekend before we’ll know if the former Australian rugby league player has managed to win final selection to play for the San Francisco 49s in the year’s NFL season.
He’s not the first Australian to make it in the United States and the American football league. So what is it about Hayne that’s captured the attention of people both here in Australia and in the US?
I’ve followed Hayne’s career for many years and he is a graduate from the school of hard knocks. As a young boy, raised by a single mother in Sydney’s south-west, Hayne’s instinct was to fight for his family so they would eventually have their own home.
Growing up in a Campbelltown housing commission building would not have been easy for Hayne, who started playing rugby league as a six year old. But the San Francisco 49ers recruit was blessed with the right physical attributes to become a star athlete.
As the son of a Fijian rugby league player and an Australian mother, Hayne’s football pedigree is a bonus. His fast-twitch fibres in his powerful muscles helped him to become one of the fastest schoolboys on the track. He won a national schoolboys title for 100m hurdles, without an ounce of training.
Hayne used his athletic build and speed to his advantage and debuted for the Parramatta Eels in the NRL at just 18. He won the 2006 Dally M Rookie of the Year award and a coveted spot in the Kangaroos squad.
The 49ers running back and return specialist exceeded expectations with his speed and evasive skills, and set the field alight with some blistering runs. Hayne’s athleticism, strength and speed took his NFL opponents by surprise. Seasoned NFL commentators were stunned.
History has a habit of repeating itself, and in Hayne’s case, this is what has happened, when comparing his form during his youth. When Hayne is fresh, focused and challenged, he is more likely to rev up and produce spectacular football.
In 2006, as a fresh-faced teenager, Hayne starred in his rookie NRL season. Hayne is now reliving the freedom of a new experience – and he’s embracing the challenge.
Hayne’s willingness to work outside his comfort zone reflects his ability to handle pressure-cooker situations. An adrenaline-fuelled Hayne has shown his tolerance to pressure in his three preseason games with the 49ers.
Both the Australian and American press went berserk over the so-called “Hayne Plane” and he has kept his eye on the ball.
Will Hayne make the final team?
Hayne’s initiation to the NFL is something that footballers dream of. But can the 27-year-old megastar sustain his momentum and continue to play a key role for the 49ers?
The NFL, known for its ruthless nickname “Not For Long”, is a seemingly elusive goal for spirited Australians, as they’ve pitted their talents against thousands of American hopefuls.
Former NFL punter and Geelong captain Ben Graham, who was the first Australian to play in the Super Bowl, said many hours of preparation was invested in every play, on top of physical and skills training.
Back in 2006 while punting for the New York Jets, Graham said:
[…] it’s up to the individual player to put themselves in the best position to win a job because it’s not as easy as a lot of people think it is.
But there’s no doubt that there’s ability in Australia to make that transition.
While AFL footballers-turned punters have made effective transitions into NFL, Hayne arrives from NRL where there is no history of success.
Hayne has proven he can become a leading return specialist for punts and kick-offs. Some of Hayne’s “catch-me-if-you-can” runs have enthralled sports fans worldwide. These golden moments have been played online repeatedly since his pre-season debut.
Hayne’s training attitude is second to none (we know of his practice of stuffing cheat notes into his shorts), as he learns the intricacies of a game that is likened to “physical chess”.
Hayne is building skills for specialist positions, such as a back-up running back.
San Franciso 49ers head coach Jim Tomsula has been careful to manage the reaction to Hayne’s sensational form – but his praise has been glowing. He told reporters:
I feel very good about his abilities to field. I feel very good about his abilities to perform with a ball in his hands on special teams.
The coverage parts of it? I’ve seen a lot of improvement there. The guy will fly down the field in those areas.
There has been huge reaction on social media related to Hayne’s on-field feats and the official season hasn’t even began. The 49ers’ final 53-man roster will be decided on September 6.
The odds are swinging in Hayne’s favour. He is fast becoming a brand that has caught the 49ers and his management offguard – typical of the “Hayne Train”.
NFL fans and Aussie tourists have quickly snapped up Hayne’s number 38 jerseys in official stores and now they’ve sold out.
You can’t endorse an athlete more highly than excited fans, who can’t get enough of him.

How NFL Equipment Works
Anyone who has ever watched an NFL game knows that equipment is a big part of the sport of professional football. Every part of the player's body is covered and protected by some sort of equipment.
­Have you ever wondered where all of this equipment comes from, what the players wear or how the team manages the huge amount of equipment that goes into each game? In this article, we'll take a fascinating tour through the locker room of the Carolina Panthers, an NFL team based in Charlotte, N.C., and find out just what it takes to suit up on game day -- it all begins with the equipment manager!
Equipment Management
Professional football puts incredible physical stress on the players -- imagine what it would be like to be regularly hammered by a 230-pound object (like a linebacker) moving at terrific speeds! Without the protective equipment, the game would be nearly impossible -- injuries would wipe out the entire team immediately. Even with the equipment, the players have to be in incredible shape to handle the pounding they endure.
Thanks!
Thanks to Atlanta Falcons equipment manager Brian Boigner, Carolina Panthers equipment manager Jackie Miles, and Falcons cornerback Juran Bolden for all their help with this article.
Equipment is an integral part of professional football, and an NFL team uses a huge amount of it! You see some of it at each game -- the balls, helmets, jerseys, shoes and so on. Much of it, however, is invisible -- the pads are a good example. There's a good bit of equipment that most people never think about, like the cleats that screw into the bottom of the players' shoes, or the sweats that the team wears during practice. Some of it is just plain unexpected, like the chemical hand-warmers, heated benches and chewing gum the team uses. And all of it has a multiplier of 53, the number of players on a team's roster during the normal season.
That multiplier is what changes the job of equipment management into an incredibly interesting logistical position for any team. For example, a typical NFL team consumes somewhere around 2,500 pairs of shoes in a single season! Someone has to keep track of everything or the team can't play.
The role of equipment manager has become an extremely important one for every NFL team. The equipment manager has two big areas of responsibility:
Protecting the players - First and foremost, an equipment manager's job is to fit each player on the team with a customized array of equipment that will provide maximum protection against injury.
Managing the logistics - The equipment manager must handle the tons of equipment the team uses on a daily basis, keep all of it repaired and in stock and move it around for all of the road games.
These twin responsibilities have made equipment management both a science and an incredibly demanding role on any NFL team. For the Carolina Panthers, the job of equipment manager falls on the shoulders of Jackie Miles.
The Locker Room
Miles' world is an extremely interesting one. It involves everything from knowing each player -- his preferences and individual injuries -- personally so that the right equipment provides maximum protection, to making sure that all of that equipment is on hand in the locker room.
It also involves an unbelievable number of parts stored in bins, cabinets, racks and crates.
Other Necessities
When you think of the equipment manager, you might just think of uniforms, pads, shoes and footballs, but the range is truly amazing -- it also includes stocking the gum the players chew!
Teams can go through an enormous amount of chewing gum. Here we see approximately 7,200 sticks!
As you can see, the role of equipment manager for an NFL team is one of the most intricate jobs around! Ultimately, however, it all comes down to protecting each player individually. In the following sections we will look at the different pieces of equipment that make protection possible.
A regulation NFL football is 11 inches (28 cm) long and about 28 inches (71 cm) in circumference at its widest point. According to the NFL Rules Digest, "The home club shall have 36 balls for outdoor games and 24 for indoor games available for testing with a pressure gauge by the referee two hours prior to the starting time of the game to meet with League requirements. Twelve (12) new footballs, sealed in a special box and shipped by the manufacturer, will be opened in the officials’ locker room two hours prior to the starting time of the game. These balls are to be specially marked with the letter "k" and used exclusively for the kicking game."
The Helmet Protecting the head from injury is obviously important, because a concussion can easily put a player out of commission. To provide maximum protection, the equipment manager's goal is to provide each player with a helmet that fits perfectly. Starting at the top, a player's equipment begins with the helmet and mouth guard.
The helmet consists of several different parts:
Shell - The team stocks four different models, two each from two different manufacturers.
Jaw pads and air bladders - Come in a variety of thicknesses for a perfect fit
Face mask - Comes in 15 different styles
Chin strap - Comes in six different styles
Mouth guard - Comes in a variety of colors and sizes
Since the NFL allowed wireless communication in regular-season NFL games in 1994, quarterbacks can't get coaches out of their heads. Rather than coaches calling a time-out in order to give a play to a quarterback, many of today's teams are opting for radios inside their quarterback's helmet. Players from the "old school" might argue that this creates an unfair advantage, but proponents say that the radio helmets make for clear coach-to-QB communication, even in large, noisy games like the Super Bowl.
According to a press interview held with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, the quality of the sound is good, but crowd noise factors in. “It’s about like what you’d hear over a loudspeaker,” said Bucs QB Shaun King. “It can be hard to hear when there’s a lot of noise on the outside, but it’s pretty clear.”
The helmets are set up with a small speaker in each ear hole. Quarterback coaches or offensive coordinators on the sidelines talk to the quarterback with a radio, giving him specific plays and options.
You can find out more about the evolution of this wireless communication and its recent uses by reading " A Wireless Superbowl."
Fitting a Helmet
Two tools that help with the fitting process are calipers and the inflation bulb.
Miles starts the fitting process by measuring the player's head with the calipers. Based on those measurements, Miles chooses a helmet shell of the appropriate size and style. Next, padding is added to ensure that the helmet fits that player's head.
Padding consists of both foam-rubber pads and inflatable (air) pads. Both the top and side padding include inflatable bladders that customize the fit. Once the helmet is in place on the player's head, Miles applies the inflator bulb to two points on the outside of the helmet.
Next, Miles fits jaw pads to ensure that the lower part of the helmet is snug against the player's face. The helmets that most NFL teams use are remarkably light, and once the pads are in place, the helmet is essentially "glued on" -- there is no movement or shifting; it's as though the helmet has become a part of your head.
The next part of the helmet is the face mask, which the player chooses. The Panthers have 15 different styles in stock.
The face mask in the upper left provides good visibility for a quarterback or receiver; bottom left has a little more extension and might be used by a tight end; upper right would be chosen by someone like a linebacker; bottom right would be typical for a lineman.
Equipment prep begins after each game for Miles and his staff. They replace as many as 15 face masks after every game because of damage. Each week, all of the helmet decals are stripped off and then replaced, the shells are cleaned with an SOS pad and then polished with Future floor wax.
Once the player has chosen his face mask, he chooses a chin strap from the several styles available and Miles fits it appropriately.
Another piece of equipment associated with the head is the mouth guard. These are simple half-moons of plastic with a strap on the end -- the strap hooks around the player's face mask so it isn't lost during play. Fitting a mouth guard is simple: You put it in warm water and allow the plastic to soften. Then the player puts the mouth guard in his mouth, leaving an imprint of his teeth and gums. As the plastic cools, the mold hardens. The result is a mouth guard specific to one player's mouth.
The last piece of equipment that a player can use to protect his head and neck is a neck roll. This foam roll fits around the back part of the jersey's neckline, and is intended to protect the head from being pushed too far backward -- or to lessen the blow when the head is snapped backward.
The Shoulder Pads
In addition to protecting the head and neck from injury, it's also important to protect the player's body. This is where body pads come in. These pads protect the body during all the pushing, tackles, sacks and pile-ups that occur in any game. The player's jersey and pants cover these pads.
There are four pieces of equipment that protect the player's body: Shoulder pads, Hip pads, Thigh pads, Knee pads
The shoulder pads are probably the most intricate pieces of equipment that the players wear. Shoulder pads consist of a hard plastic shell with foam padding underneath. The pads fit over the shoulders and the chest and rib area, and are secured with various snaps and buckles. Shoulder pads are what give football players their "broad-shouldered" look.
For the Panthers, Miles stocks 12 different styles (essentially one style for every position), with four different sizes per style. A number of custom fitting and padding options are also available, depending on each player's body type and injuries.
The shoulder pads do two things for the player:
They absorb some of the shock of impact through deformation. The pads at the shoulders are strung on tight webbing and deform on impact.
They distribute the shock through a larger area so there is less pressure at the point of impact.
The interior of a set of shoulder pads is padded with foam. Miles can use Velcro to attach additional pads to build up protection or to take pressure off an injury by bridging over it.
Although the outside of the pads is hard, the side closest to the player's skin is a softer cloth padding.
The shoulder pads are covered by a jersey. Without the pads, the jersey is usually pretty big on players. But the jersey is cut so that when the player suits up with pads, it is tight-fitting.
Below the waist, the players choose pads depending on their position and injuries. A fully suited player would have several types of pads, including hip pads, knee pads and thigh pads. There are several styles of knee and thigh pads for players to choose from.
Hip pads protect players' hip and pelvic bones in hard falls.
Thigh and knee pads are available in several styles and sizes.
These pads are inserted into pockets on the inside of the player's pants prior to suiting up.
Without hand protection, receivers wouldn't be able to catch the ball, and without foot protection, the players would constantly be subject to injury. This is why gloves and shoes, or cleats, are so important.
Many receivers wear gloves that either have a sticky rubber palm, called tact gloves, or are covered with a sticky substance like rosin or a sticky spray. Linemen also wear gloves -- they don't have to catch the ball, but they do have to use their hands to fight off opposing linemen. The gloves worn by linemen usually have thick padding in them to better protect their fingers and hands, which can sometimes get caught up in another player's face mask or be stepped on in a pile of players. Players are not permitted to put any type of gel or "stick 'ems" on their gloves.
Shoes have become a huge part of professional sports, for two main reasons:
There is now a big commercial aspect to the shoes the players wear. Not only do many teams (like the Panthers) have a team-wide contract with a sports company (like Nike or Reebok), but many players also have individual contracts with a shoe company.
More importantly (from the team's standpoint), shoes can have a big effect on injuries -- especially injuries to the knees.
If a player wears the wrong shoe and it sticks to the turf, he gets knee injuries. An NFL team plays both on Astroturf and on natural grass, and the surface on game day can be dry, damp, wet or icy. Conditions can even change in the middle of a game. Each surface and condition requires a different shoe, and it's the equipment manager's job to anticipate the needs of the team and get the correct shoe on every foot.

Steelers' Mike Tomlin: We want hotter practices for 'more stressful environment'

Pittsburgh Steelers head coach Mike Tomlin is turning up the heat on his team — literally. Tomlin is moving the Steelers' training camp practices to the afternoon this summer; he explained the rationale.

"Wasn't hot enough last year. To be quite honest with you, heat aids in the development of physical conditioning. It makes it a more stressful environment, and that's what we go to camp for," Tomlin said on Thursday after the Steelers' mandatory minicamp, according to NFL.com. "We go to camp to get better, and if it's a little bit more miserable late in the day, man, that's what we want."

Pittsburgh will hold its 2025 training camp at Saint Vincent College in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, which is roughly one hour east of Acrisure Stadium, home of the Steelers.

As for stories to keep tabs on with the Steelers this summer, they recently added 41-year-old quarterback and four-time NFL MVP Aaron Rodgers, who will be throwing passes to star wide receiver and two-time Pro Bowler DK Metcalf, whom Pittsburgh acquired from the Seattle Seahawks this offseason.

Superstar linebacker T.J. Watt hasn't been present for the team's minicamp this week, as he seeks an extension; Watt, a four-time All-Pro, is entering the final year of a four-year, $112 million deal. Tomlin expressed that he's "optimistic" a deal will eventually be worked out with Watt.

The Steelers are coming off a 10-7 season that saw them lose to the Baltimore Ravens in the AFC wild-card round. Tomlin is entering his 19th season as Pittsburgh's head coach, with the team never posting a losing season and owning a combined 183-107-2 regular-season record and 8-11 postseason record under him. All that said, the Steelers haven't won a playoff game since the 2016 season.

Want great stories delivered right to your inbox? Create or log in to your FOX Sports account, and follow leagues, teams and players to receive a personalized newsletter daily!

This fall, Bucs receiver Mike Evans has a chance to break Jerry Rice's record of 11 consecutive seasons with at least 1,000 receiving yards, a mark Evans matched in 2024. He has topped the 1,000-yard threshold every year of his career, so it's not surprising that Evans has more receiving yards over the past decade (11,633 yards) than any other NFL pass-catcher. 

At age 31 and entering his 12th NFL season, Evans continues to build on a Hall of Fame résumé. Last season, he passed 100 career touchdowns. So who better to ask about the next generation of wide receivers? At Bucs minicamp, Evans took some time to talk with FOX Sports about his favorite young receivers across the league.

EVANS: Wait, what does young mean?

FOX Sports: Young, for you these days, is most everybody, right?

EVANS: Everybody but like D-Hop (DeAndre Hopkins), Davante (Adams) and (Brandin) Cooks.

FOX Sports: We'll say first four or five years in the league then.

EVANS: Ja'Marr Chase. He's a guy where if you said he was better than me — I don't think anybody's better than me — but if you said him, I would understand. So Ja'Marr, Justin Jefferson, Nico Collins, Drake (London).
FOX Sports: Nobody is going to argue with you on Jefferson. What do you like about Nico?

EVANS: He's kind of like a mix of me and Julio Jones. He's 6-4, 6-5, but he can run up and catch like Julio and he has muscles like Julio. He has the length like me. I love Nico's game.

FOX Sports: You mentioned the Falcons' Drake London, who you get to face twice a year. He's a guy people will compare to you, because of the size and athleticism.

EVANS: I've known Drake since he was in high school. (Former Bucs receivers coach) Andrew Hayes-Stoker was recruiting him (while at Illinois) and he asked me to reach out to him. I looked him up a little bit and was like, "Man, this dude can hoop, and he can play football." So he was similar to me, and I've always been a fan of his game. We still talk sometimes, and we've swapped jerseys a few times.

FOX Sports: Anybody younger? First or second-year guys?

EVANS: (Bucs rookie) Emeka (Egbuka) is extremely polished already. He reminds me of Chris (Godwin) so much, and he's really explosive and smart. He's going to have a great career. Brian Thomas, Malik Nabers …  is A.J. Brown young? I like them all. The game is a passing league now even more. 

Ex-NFL star Antonio Brown wanted on attempted murder charge


Former NFL wide receiver Antonio Brown is wanted by authorities in Miami-Dade County on a criminal charge of attempted murder stemming from a shooting at a celebrity boxing event in May, according to The Washington Post.

The warrant lists a charge of attempted murder with a firearm and calls for Brown to post a $10,000 bond and remain under house arrest pending trial. It was signed by a judge on Wednesday. Efforts to reach Brown have been unsuccessful, and it is unclear whether he was represented by an attorney, according to the report.

The criminal charge is related to an incident that occurred outside an event in Miami on May 16, when Brown was briefly detained by police following an altercation in which gunshots were fired outside the venue just before midnight. Brown, who lives in Fort Lauderdale, was released later that night.

Video posted to social media showed Brown involved in a fight with several people, and he was seen apparently holding a black pistol as he pursued someone. Shots could be heard off camera shortly thereafter. Miami police confirmed in a written statement that officers responded to the area at about 3 a.m. after receiving an alert from a gunshot-detection system. A department spokesperson said police questioned several people but made no arrests.

Additional video showed Brown, hands behind his back, being escorted from the venue by an officer. Brown posted on social media that he had been "jumped by multiple individuals" who tried to steal his jewelry and cause him physical harm. His statement did not mention the gunshots.

Patrons in the parking lot told officers that Brown was the shooter, according to the warrant, which also states that Brown had no weapon on him when officers patted him down, per The Washington Post's reporting.

According to the warrant, Miami police detectives later obtained video footage that shows Brown appearing to take the gun of a security officer and running toward the man he had punched. The warrant also reveals that cellphone video captured two gunshots as Brown approached the victim, who is seen ducking.

Detectives met with the alleged victim — who confirmed that Brown shot at him twice and the two struggled over the gun before police arrived and Brown walked away — the following week on May 21, according to the warrant. According to The Washington Post, the warrant also revealed that the victim said he had known Brown since 2022.

A sixth-round draft pick by the Pittsburgh Steelers in 2010, Brown quickly emerged as one of the top receivers of his generation, earning seven Pro Bowl nods over an eight-year career with The Black and Gold. In that time, he led the NFL in receptions twice (2014, 2015), in receiving yards twice (2014, 2017) and in receiving touchdowns once (2018).

Brown's career ultimately took a downturn because of various on- and off-field issues. He had a short stint with the New England Patriots in 2019, lasting just one game before being released. The 36-year-old Super Bowl champion last played in the NFL with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 2021.

PGA Tour to hire NFL executive Brian Rolapp as CEO of business enterprise

The PGA Tour is hiring longtime NFL executive Brian Rolapp as the first CEO of its new commercial division, created two years ago when the it reached a tentative agreement with the Saudi backers of LIV Golf, The Associated Press confirmed Thursday.

Jay Monahan, who announced the framework agreement in June 2023, will stay on as commissioner of the PGA Tour. Monahan announced in December the search for a CEO of PGA Tour Enterprises, now backed by a $1.5 billion investment from Strategic Sports Group.

The tour declined comment on the hiring, first reported by Sports Business Journal.

A person with direct knowledge of the tour's plans confirmed the hiring, speaking on condition of anonymity because nothing has been announced. Such developments typically are not publicized during major championships.

Rolapp has been with the NFL since 2003 and has been executive vice president and chief media and business officer since 2017, working closely with Commissioner Roger Goodell.

Sports Business Journal obtained a memo Goodell sent to staff Thursday announcing Rolapp would be leaving to pursue other opportunities.

Monahan announced an agreement with the Public Investment Fund of Saudi Arabia, which was never finalized. From that framework agreement came a for-profit arm, PGA Tour Enterprises, which Rolapp would oversee.

The tour brought on SSG in January 2024, and soon announced a first-of-its-kind equity plan for players.

Monahan said in December of the CEO search, "We're bringing new perspectives on to our team to help us realize the incredible opportunities ahead for our sport."

Meanwhile, negotiations with PIF to bring the world's best players together stalled in the spring, even with the involvement of President Donald Trump, as LIV Golf wants to keep its team concept in place. LIV Golf has since hired Scott O'Neil as its new CEO.

Rolapp brings strong media connections to the PGA Tour, which is starting to plan for new broadcast deals that run through 2030. The PGA Tour has seen a strong uptick this year through extensive feedback from its fans, including a recent decision to revamp the Tour Championship to crown its FedEx Cup champion.

Arthur Blank, the Atlanta Falcons owner who is part of SSG, was part of the search committee that included Tiger Woods and Adam Scott, Monahan, PGA Tour board chairman Joe Gorder and Sam Kennedy from SSG.

Reporting by The Associated Press.

QB Stock Market: After Aaron Rodgers signing, Steelers' nightmare is just beginning
The NFL offseason is far from over, but the roster building is largely complete.

We saw the final starting quarterback fall into place last week, as Aaron Rodgers (finally) signed with the Pittsburgh Steelers. There’s an outside chance the Falcons' Kirk Cousins could still join another team and take over as a starter, but in all likelihood, every club’s starting QB is already on its roster. So, now seems like the perfect time to rank them.

I took a look at what the outlook is for all 32 QBs and ranked them for 2025 with a focus on how things changed around each signal-caller over the offseason. 

Let’s dive in.

RELATED: QB Stock Market: Ranking all 32 starters after the 2024 regular season

32. Joe Flacco, Cleveland Browns
It’s anyone’s guess who will start in Cleveland. Logically, you could make the case for any one of them. 

Flacco has played well in Kevin Stefanski’s offense, and the coach needs to make sure he doesn’t get fired. Kenny Pickett cost the Browns a draft pick, and is a compelling candidate to pull off what Sam Darnold, Baker Mayfield and Geno Smith have done in recent years. And then there are the rookies, Shedeur Sanders and Dillon Gabriel. 

Whether he’s playing or not, Sanders will drive the national conversation more than any other rookie QB. And I think, sooner or later, Sanders will play.

31. Tyler Shough, New Orleans Saints
I’m optimistic that he’ll win the QB1 job. I’m not optimistic about what’ll happen next.

30. Cam Ward, Tennessee Titans
Ward’s first year in Tennessee is likely to look eerily similar to Williams’ first year in Chicago.

29. Russell Wilson, New York Giants
Wilson will fend off Jaxson Dart for as long as he can.

These are the guys Brian Daboll and Joe Schoen bet their jobs on. 

Wait, these are the guys Daboll and Schoen bet their jobs on?

28. Anthony Richardson, Indianapolis Colts
It would be extremely exciting if the Richardson experiment finally looked like a success. It just also feels a little unrealistic, given how tense things will get with GM Chris Ballard and coach Shane Steichen likely on the hot seat. There is almost a 100 percent chance that Richardson and Daniel Jones will both start for this team.

27.  Michael Penix, Atlanta Falcons
Penix didn't show us enough last year to make an honest assessment. But in the limited sample (three starts and 105 passes), he kept his team competitive. 

26. Aaron Rodgers, Pittsburgh Steelers 
I just want to let myself get excited about DK Metcalf and Kaleb Johnson and Jaylen Warren and Pat Friermuth and Broderick Jones. And I’d let myself, if it wasn’t for … Aaron Rodgers.

It seemed that folks in Pittsburgh breathed a sigh of relief when Rodgers signed: Finally, this nightmare is over. 

But that’s not how it works with this version of Rodgers. The nightmare is just beginning.

25. Justin Fields, New York Jets
I just want to let myself get excited about Fields and Garrett Wilson and Breece Hall and Aaron Glenn and Armand Membou and Mason Taylor. And I’d let myself, if it wasn’t for … the Jets.

24. Trevor Lawrence, Jacksonville Jaguars
It feels like a decade ago when Lawrence played in the postseason. But the date was Jan. 21, 2023. Things change fast in the NFL. It’s just that I’m not sure Lawrence has changed enough since entering the league as the top pick in 2021.

23. Bryce Young, Carolina Panthers 
For those who watched Carolina in the back half of last season, Young reminded everyone why he was the No. 1 overall pick in 2023. But few watched. His job in 2025 will be to ensure everyone has no choice.

22. Kyler Murray, Arizona Cardinals 
I’m fading on Murray, who has no feel for how and when to use his tremendous talents to tip the scales of a game and generate wins for his team. It’s the Cardinals (who have been bad for a long time), so take this with a grain of salt. But Murray is 36-45-1 in his career.

21. Caleb Williams, Chicago Bears 
Williams remains one of the best young QB prospects in the NFL. Now, he has one of the best situations in the NFL. Let's see some results.

20. Drake Maye, New England Patriots 
Maye has kept a low profile while his hype train gains steam. Film junkies love him, because they spent 2024 wondering: What if? Well, given how much the Patriots paid to change the complexion of this offense, we might actually find out.

19. Geno Smith, Las Vegas Raiders
Can Pete Carroll have the Jim Harbaugh effect? By that, I mean: Can Carroll’s experience make up for a massively flawed roster? I don’t think so. Nor do I think Smith is anywhere near as talented as Herbert. Las Vegas will go through big growing pains this year.

18. Tua Tagovailoa, Miami Dolphins 
The Dolphins are going to have to score a lot of points, given the current complexion of their secondary. (It’s a disaster — worst in the NFL.) That could be a problem for Tua and Miami. The Dolphins, who once scored 70 points in a game in 2023, scored the 11th fewest points (20.3) in 2024.

17. Sam Darnold, Seattle Seahawks
Darnold left one of the NFL’s best situations and landed in one that’s solid. I don’t expect him to wholly fall apart. I think he’ll still be fairly prolific. (Geno Smith was.) But I don’t know that Darnold will wow us — nor will he surprise — in 2025.

16. C.J. Stroud, Houston Texans
The rookie year was impressive, though maybe that’s been overstated at this point. The sophomore year was unimpressive … and maybe that’s also been overstated at this point. I genuinely don’t know where he goes from here.

15. Brock Purdy, San Francisco 49ers
The 49ers lost their way offensively in 2024, and it wasn’t just because of injuries. Yes, Purdy was sorting out how to manage a locker room, a huddle and a game plan without his best players. But I also think Kyle Shanahan was doing that in a season where teams schematically caught up to the 49ers’ system.

For the 49ers, is this the beginning of the end? Or the beginning of a new chapter?

14. Bo Nix, Denver Broncos 
Here’s a guy who quickly learned how to eliminate bad plays. Nix is boring. But if he can stay in a good system with a good supporting cast, there’s no reason why he won’t be the next Jared Goff — and maybe even with a little more athleticism.

13. Jordan Love, Green Bay Packers
Love has to do what is theoretically simple but actionably difficult (and boring). He needs to eliminate bad plays from his repertoire — even if that means losing some of his explosive, highlight-reel plays.

Jordan Love #10 of the Green Bay Packers reacts after a holding penalty in the fourth quarter of a game against the Philadelphia Eagles during the NFC Wild Card Playoff at Lincoln Financial Field on January 12, 2025 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  (Photo by Mitchell Leff/Getty Images)

12. J.J. McCarthy, Minnesota Vikings
You could put just about anyone in the Vikings’ QB slot, and I’d get excited about him. But McCarthy was a top-10 pick in what’s shaping up to be an incredible QB class. This year, McCarthy might look like 2023 Brock Purdy — an athletic point guard with an idyllic supporting cast.

11. Dak Prescott, Dallas Cowboys
It was a bad 2024 season for Prescott before the injury. The arrivals of George Pickens and Tyler Booker should help. But given that Prescott is making $60 million per year (and given that he plays for the most-discussed football team in the world), he’s going to be living on a knife's edge for the whole 2025 season.

10. Justin Herbert, Los Angeles Chargers 
It’ll be the second year in Jim Harbaugh’s system. Herbert will have more help, with the arrival of Mike Williams, Tre Harris, Omarion Hampton, Najee Harris and Mekhi Becton. It’s the Chargers, so they’ll always let you down. But Herbert should have another strong, efficient year.

9. Baker Mayfield, Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Can he survive losing two offensive coordinators in as many years? 

Here’s what Mayfield did after losing his OC in 2024: 4,500 passing yards, 41 passing touchdowns. Yes, I'm betting on Baker.

8. Matthew Stafford, Los Angeles Rams 
Stafford won’t go away. I’m not as sure as everyone else that Davante Adams is the same transcendent talent at 33 years old. Adams will be WR2 behind Puka Nacua. But Stafford and Sean McVay have been too quiet for too long. This year, things are going to align for the Rams to make a deep run on the shoulders of Stafford.
7. Jared Goff, Detroit Lions 
The Lions' offseason was mostly about maintaining the status quo. But the status quo could end up being pretty damn good for Goff, who had 4,629 passing yards, 37 passing touchdowns and 12 interceptions.

6. Jayden Daniels, Washington Commanders
The first act was incredible. He was the Offensive Rookie of the Year and he appeared in the NFC Championship Game. He might regress, if only because of how much he achieved. But it’ll be important to keep in perspective how good he is, even if he’s just below where he finished last year.

5. Jalen Hurts, Philadelphia Eagles
The Eagles were at their best in an efficiency-based passing offense — maximizing each throw, but throwing relatively sparingly.

So, what happens if this Eagles defense isn’t reliable — or even good? That’ll put more on Hurts. I look forward to seeing him taking over a few games with his arm.

4. Lamar Jackson, Baltimore Ravens
Nothing’s changed.

Here comes another huge year from Lamar. And it feels criminal to have him ranked fourth, but I hope people see that's a testament to the current quality of QBs (and not a shot at Lamar).

3. Josh Allen, Buffalo Bills
This coming year, the Bills won’t suddenly shift into a high-volume passing attack, but Allen will have more help with the addition of Josh Palmer and the growth of Khalil Shakir, Keon Coleman and Dalton Kincaid. Because of that, I think Allen might only get better.
2. Joe Burrow, Cincinnati Bengals
Here comes another huge statistical year from Joe Burrow. The offense is likely to play as well as it did last year. The defense is likely to play as poorly as it did last year. So it’s not just that Burrow is playing the best football of his life. It’s that he’ll have to play the best football of his life in order for the Bengals to stay playoff-relevant.

1. Patrick Mahomes, Kansas City Chiefs
Mahomes might not finish the season with a stellar record, but his individual performances will look a whole lot prettier than last year. The Chiefs invested in the left tackle position in both free agency (Jaylon Moore) and the draft (Josh Simmons). I’m willing to bet that position holds solid throughout the season. If the line keeps it together and the young wideouts (Rashee Rice, Xavier Worthy) continue to ascend, Mahomes can finally do more with his offense. Which means he’ll be the best QB in the NFL again.

Before joining FOX Sports as an NFL reporter and columnist, Henry McKenna spent seven years covering the Patriots for USA TODAY Sports Media Group and Boston Globe Media. Follow him on Twitter at @henrycmckenna. 

Want great stories delivered right to your inbox? Create or log in to your FOX Sports account, and follow leagues, teams and players to receive a personalized newsletter daily!

Star rookies? The best schematic fits from all 32 NFL Draft classes
In the immediate afterglow of the NFL draft, seemingly every selection looks like a future starter. 

But reality starts to settle in during the subsequent rookie minicamps and organized team activities (OTAs). And with mandatory minicamp upon us, it is already becoming clear that some of this year’s most impactful rookies might prove to be players who were selected much later than the first round.

Clubs often subscribe to the "best player available" strategy in the opening frame, gambling on high-upside athletes before addressing their biggest positions of need in the middle rounds. 

The purpose of this article is to take a team-by-team deep dive and highlight the best schematic fits. Put another way, these are the rookies for each team likeliest to make the biggest impact in 2025. 

Teams are listed alphabetically. 

Arizona Cardinals: Will Johnson, CB, Michigan (No. 47 pick)
I’m excited about front-seven defenders Walter Nolen III and Jordan Burch, but it is the player selected between them — Johnson — who projects as the Day 1 starter. The 6-foot-2, 194-pounder has the bulk, instincts and big-play chops to star in a secondary already boasting one of the league’s better safety tandems in Budda Baker and Jalen Thompson. 

Atlanta Falcons: Jalon Walker, OLB, Georgia (No. 15 pick)
Anyone capable of helping a pass rush that finished 31st in the NFL in sacks a year ago would make sense for this spot, but Walker’s burst, bend and versatility make him an especially intriguing fit in Raheem Morris’ defense. With a clear pathway to playing time for a squad I think could make some noise in a winnable NFC South division, Walker is a realistic candidate for Defensive Rookie of the Year. 
Baltimore Ravens: Malaki Starks, S, Georgia (No. 27 overall)
The first-round investment in Starks looks that much smarter now given that veteran Ar’Darius Washington — his primary competition to play opposite star Kyle Hamilton — suffered a torn Achilles a few weeks after the draft. Starks’ range and ball skills should weaponize a Ravens’ secondary that got half of their 12 interceptions last season from cornerback Marlon Humphrey.  

Buffalo Bills: Maxwell Hairston, CB, Kentucky (No. 30 overall)
With all due respect to the rebuilding Jets and Patriots, the only real threat to the Bills in the AFC East is the Dolphins' speedy offense. How better to counter that than with the fastest player in the draft in Hairston, a proven ballhawk? I loved this class for the Bills and think their first-round pick is its legitimate crown jewel. 

Carolina Panthers: Nic Scourton, OLB, Texas A&M (No. 51 overall)
I differed with many draft analysts, as I’m lower nthan most on Carolina’s top pick, Tetairoa McMillan, but gave Scourton a first-round grade. Between the healthy return of veteran D.J. Wonnum and the the addition of the power-packed Scourton, expect Carolina’s pass rush to be significantly improved in 2025 after finishing tied for 30th in the NFL last year. 

Chicago Bears: Luther Burden III, WR, Missouri (No. 39 overall)
I thought Burden was the most dynamic receiver after the catch in this class. Pairing him with Caleb Williams and Ben Johnson and the explosive pass-catchers (including top pick Colston Loveland) already on this roster will immediately boost an offense that ranked 28th in the league a year ago in points scored. 
Cincinnati Bengals: Dylan Fairchild, OG, Georgia (No. 81 overall)
Fairchild was the Bengals’ third pick, but he is being penciled in as the starter at left guard. He’s strong, smart and battle-tested and is in a position to succeed, operating between two steady veterans in Orlando Brown Jr. and Ted Karras. 

Cleveland Browns: Carson Schwesinger, ILB, UCLA (No. 33 overall)
The scary neck injury suffered in Week 8 of last year that will keep Jeremiah Owusu-Koramoah out for all of 2025 meant that the Browns would be looking early for reinforcements at linebacker. Schwesinger has Jedi-like instincts and is a reliable open-field tackler. 

Dallas Cowboys: Donovan Ezeiruaku, Edge, Boston College (No. 44 overall)
With DeMarcus Lawrence now in Seattle and Micah Parsons opting out of OTAs in a contract dispute, the Cowboys were wise to fortify their pass rush in the draft with the reigning Ted Hendricks Award winner. Ezeiruaku's pro-ready technique and non-stop motor will quickly make him a favorite of coaches and fans alike. 
Denver Broncos: RJ Harvey, RB, UCF (No. 60 overall)
Full disclosure: Harvey ranked higher on the Broncos’ board than he did on mine, but I love his combination of vision, balance through contact and burst alongside Bo Nix in Sean Payton’s offense. While stubby at 5-9 and 208 pounds, Harvey is a true bell cow who could be a Rookie of the Year candidate in this scheme. He was charted by PFF with 54 explosive runs last year. The Broncos had nine from their running backs in 2024. 

Detroit Lions: Tyleik Williams, DT, Ohio State (No. 28 overall)
Both from a positional and personality perspective, Williams was one of my favorite picks of the 2025 draft. He plays with an infectious energy perfectly suited to Dan Campbell and the Motor City, and he gives the club time to allow fellow defensive tackle Alim McNeill to recover from last season’s Week 15 ACL tear. 

Green Bay Packers: Anthony Belton, OL, NC State (No. 54 overall)
Things certainly could be golden in Green Bay with first-rounder Matthew Golden, but at least during his rookie season, I see the wideout playing more of a complementary than starring role. That could also be the case with Belton, but I like the insurance policy he provides at left tackle (or left guard) for a team that too often has had postseason dreams ruined by midseason injuries up front. 

Houston Texans: Jaylin Noel, WR, Iowa State (No. 79 overall)
I nearly listed second-round pick Aireontae Ersery here for the same reason that Belton fit for the Packers, but I’m especially intrigued by the lightning-quick Noel’s burst on the NRG Stadium Turf. The horrific injury suffered last year by Tank Dell sapped some of the juice from Houston’s offense, but Noel is a Dell doppelgänger capable of restoring it. 

Indianapolis Colts: Tyler Warren, TE, Penn State (No. 14 overall)
I’m dating myself with this reference, but it doesn’t seem that long ago that it was Dallas Clark starring in the same No. 44 jersey that Warren wore for Penn State. Expect the coincidences to continue when Warren joins Clark (Class of 2003) on the NFL’s All-Rookie team this season or when he’s named All-Pro in the future.
Now with the Colts, Tyler Warren will look to use his versatility to help Anthony Richardson the same way he helped elevate Drew Allar. (Photo by Justin Casterline/Getty Images)

Jacksonville Jaguars: Wyatt Milum, OL, West Virginia (No. 89 overall)
Needless to say, Travis Hunter is going to be Jacksonville’s busiest and most glorified rookie, but let’s dig deeper than the No. 2 overall pick. If the Jaguars are really going to make a push in the AFC South, more grit up front is needed and Milum offers that. Like Hunter, I see Milum as one of the safest players in this class. 

Kansas City Chiefs: Josh Simmons, OT, Ohio State (No. 32 overall)
I thought Simmons was the most gifted pass-blocker in this class and that the Chiefs stole him with the final pick of the first round. Some had reservations about his recovery from knee surgery and commitment, but in Andy Reid and Patrick Mahomes (among others) in Kansas City, the leadership is in place to help Simmons live up to his All-Pro potential. 

Las Vegas Raiders: Ashton Jeanty, RB, Boise State (No. 6 overall)
If I weren’t so excited about a couple of other rookie backs in the AFC West, I might be betting the mortgage on the Raiders’ top pick running away with Rookie of the Year honors. He’s worthy of all his hype, folks, and will be featured in the Raiders' revamped attack. 
Los Angeles Chargers: Omarion Hampton, RB, North Carolina (No. 22 overall)
As much as any coach in the NFL, Jim Harbaugh demands that his team exude toughness and physicality. Hampton is the perfect bruising back for that style, possessing not only size and power but excellent hands out of the backfield. Don’t be surprised if it's Hampton — and not Justin Herbert — who powers a deeper Chargers postseason run this year. 

Los Angeles Rams: Josiah Stewart, Edge, Michigan (No. 90 overall)
Playing time could be tough to come by with the Rams boasting an underrated and deep defensive front, but I love Stewart’s violent playing style. Stubby and stronger than he looks, I expect Stewart to become a key part of the Rams’ rotation this season. 

Miami Dolphins: Kenneth Grant, DL, Michigan (No. 13 overall)
I wasn’t a fan of the Dolphins' draft as a whole, but I certainly recognize Grant’s talent and Miami’s need to get bigger and younger on the defensive line. Grant is an impressive athlete for his massive 6-4, 331-pound frame, and he’ll see a lot of single blocks as a rookie with opponents focusing on Zach Sieler and Chop Robinson. 

Minnesota Vikings: Donovan Jackson, OG, Ohio State (No. 24 overall)
Like with the aforementioned Dolphins, I see the Vikings’ most significant contribution as a rookie coming from their first-round pick. I like Jackson, viewing him as one of the few true plug-and-play guards of this class, and I’m excited to see how he and the rest of Minnesota’s rebuilt interior fare in protecting young quarterback J.J. McCarthy. 

New England Patriots: Kyle Williams, WR, Washington State (No. 69 overall)
Even before the now-infamous "boat video" raised questions about Stefon Diggs’ fit in New England, the fleet-footed Williams was an exciting addition as a downfield target for Drake Maye. The rookie has some of the best feet of this year’s receiver class, projecting similarly as Diggs when he entered the NFL out of Maryland as a fifth-round pick (by Minnesota) back in 2015. 

New Orleans Saints: Tyler Shough, QB, Louisville (No. 40 overall)
The public didn’t know about Derek Carr’s injured shoulder until after the draft, but the Saints certainly did, and I love that new head coach Kellen Moore (a former quarterback, himself) essentially got his choice of this year’s passers — with the exception of No. 1 overall pick Cam Ward, of course. The Saints took blocker Kelvin Banks at No. 9 overall, and he will almost surely start Week 1, but Shough’s upside deserves top billing. Given his extended college career, Shough is arguably the most pro-ready quarterback of this class and there are flashes of greatness for Moore to develop. 

New York Giants: Abdul Carter, Edge, Penn State (No. 3 overall)
Carter is admittedly very low-hanging fruit as the Giants’ biggest rookie contributor, but he has to be included in this article as my current top pick for Defensive Rookie of the Year honors. Carter is electric off the edge, and he’s joining one of the better defensive lines in the NFL, providing an ideal runway for Carter to vault into superstardom. 
New York Jets: Mason Taylor, TE, LSU (No. 42 overall)
Perhaps some of the reasons why the Jets have struggled to develop a young quarterback in recent years is their lack of a "security blanket" at tight end. Taylor has some of the surest hands of any pass-catcher in this class, providing an immediate boost to a franchise that hasn’t produced a Pro Bowler at TE since … 1988 (Mickey Shuler). 

Philadelphia Eagles: Jihaad Campbell, LB, Alabama (No. 31 overall)
The reigning champs enjoyed the kind of draft that suggests more Super Bowl appearances are coming. With Nakobe Dean on the mend from a torn patellar tendon, Campbell is in position to make the quickest impact — and, make no mistake, quick is the operative word given how freely he should be able to roam behind Philadelphia’s dominant defensive line. 

Pittsburgh Steelers: Kaleb Johnson, RB, Iowa (No. 83 overall)
Johnson runs with a similar power and determination as former first-round pick Najee Harris and, despite a 40-yard dash time (4.57) suggesting otherwise, he offers more of a breakaway element. He wasn’t asked to do much in the passing game at Iowa, so with Aaron Rodgers finally on board, Johnson might need patience. But if the Steelers remain committed to Arthur Smith's run-heavy system, Johnson should top the 1,043 rushing yards Harris produced last year in Pittsburgh. 

San Francisco 49ers: Mykel Williams, DL, Georgia (No. 11 overall)
I’m admittedly higher on Williams than most and see him as the perfect bully off the edge to resurrect a 49ers defense reeling from offseason losses. Williams’ career-high five sacks in 2024 only hint at his talent. Don’t be surprised if he contributes more than that as a rookie, and if he’s even better against the run, too. 
Seattle Seahawks: Grey Zabel, OG, North Dakota State (No. 18 overall)
Replacing Geno Smith, DK Metcalf and Tyler Lockett with Sam Darnold, Cooper Kupp and Marquez Valdes-Scantling is only the tip of the tidal wave of change to Seattle’s offense since last season. While personnel has dominated the conversation for most, the Seahawks are also switching to more of a wide zone blocking scheme, prioritizing athleticism over mass. Zabel was arguably this year’s most athletic offensive lineman, dominating both the Senior Bowl and Combine. He’s expected to start at left guard immediately for a club dedicated to running the ball much more than a year ago, when the Seahawks' 383 attempts were the fourth-fewest in the NFL. 

Tampa Bay Buccaneers: Benjamin Morrison, CB, Notre Dame (No. 53 overall)
It is easy to understand why pass-catchers Emeka Egbuka and Tez Johnson are getting most of the rookie hype out of Tampa, but I’m just as intrigued by the club’s double-dipping with DBs Morrison and Jacob Parrish, both of which project as future starterz. Morrison’s blend of awareness and ball skills could make him an ideal counterpart to rising star Zyon McCollum. 

Tennessee Titans: Oluwafemi "Femi" Oladejo, Edge, UCLA (No. 52 overall)
Needless to say, top overall pick Cam Ward is the guy, but Titans fans should be very excited about Oladejo, as well. Like Ward, Oladejo is an ascending player who, based on reports out of OTAs, is already earning first-team reps. 

Washington Commanders: Trey Amos, CB, Ole Miss (No. 61 overall)
To justify this selection, Amos will need to prove that he’s over the back issues which contributed to his slip to the deep second round, but the tape shows one of the stickier, savvier man-to-man corners in this class — and a perfect schematic fit in Dan Quinn’s defense.

Rob Rang is an NFL Draft analyst for FOX Sports. He has been covering the NFL Draft for more than 20 years, with work at FOX, Sports Illustrated, CBSSports.com, USA Today, Yahoo, NFL.com and NFLDraftScout.com, among others. He also works as a scout with the BC Lions of the Canadian Football League. Follow him on X @RobRang.

Want great stories delivered right to your inbox? Create or log in to your FOX Sports account, follow leagues, teams and players to receive a personalized newsletter daily.

Five things the 49ers must do to win a Super Bowl after paying Brock Purdy
After spending the past two seasons contemplating how to reward their franchise quarterback for his stellar work as a starter, the San Francisco 49ers now have to plot out how to build a roster around a big-money quarterback. With Brock Purdy commanding $265 million on a five-year deal, the 49ers must surround him with an elite collection of playmakers and pass protectors, while retooling a defense that has lost some of the swagger and sack production that made it one of the league’s most feared units. 

Perhaps CEO Jed York, general manager John Lynch and head coach Kyle Shanahan have already crafted multiple versions of a plan designed to keep the team in title contention, while upgrading the depth chart to ensure Purdy has the surrounding personnel to help him maintain the gold standard of quarterback play that has the Faithful reminiscing about days of Joe Montana and Steve Young. 

Given Purdy's 23-13 record, 67.5% completion rate, 64:27 touchdown-to-interception ratio and 104.9 passer rating through 40 career games (36 starts), including a spectacular 2023 campaign, it is easy to envision the 49ers hoisting a Lombardi Trophy with him at the helm if they make the right moves to accentuate his game and elevate his play as the QB1 of a perennial title contender. 

Here are five things the 49ers must do moving forward to win with Purdy on a big-money extension. 
1. Build a dominant running game around CMC and others in the backfield 
The 49ers’ offense begins and ends with an old-school running game that transforms pedestrian runners into 1,000-yard rushers, and Pro Bowl-caliber playmakers into MVP candidates. Christian McCaffrey has flashed gold-jacket potential as the RB1 in a scheme that enables him to work the edges and between the tackles on zone and gap scheme runs. The two-time All-Pro is averaging 115.5 scrimmage yards, including 77.6 rushing yards, in 31 games with the Niners. In addition, he has scored 31 total touchdowns and claimed a rushing title with the club. 
While CMC is certainly the straw that stirs the drink, the 49ers have been able to post solid numbers on the ground with a collection of super-subs filling in at running back. Whether it was Jordan Mason (5.2) or Isaac Guerendo (5.0) last year, the 49ers averaged at least five yards per carry when one of the backups carries the ball as the temporary RB1. With the steady production forcing opponents to load the box out of respect for the running game, the 49ers’ ground attack is crucial for creating big-play opportunities for Purdy off play-action passes. 

2. Stockpile the lineup with "catch-and-run" specialists on the perimeter 
The 49ers’ success through the air is sparked by their ability to transform short passes into big plays due to the explosiveness of their perimeter pass-catchers. Since Shanahan took over in 2017, the 49ers have prioritized running skills with their wideouts as part of an effort to maximize the potential yardage after each catch. The team has coveted playmakers with punt return experience to ensure their perimeter receivers possess the skill, toughness and contact balance to run around or through defenders in space. 

Deebo Samuel, George Kittle, and Brandon Aiyuk were so effective as runners that the group earned the nickname "YAC Bros." due to their ability to rack up yardage in the open field. Though Samuel is no longer in a 49ers uniform, Kittle and Aiyuk are joined by Jauan Jennings and Ricky Pearsall on the perimeter to continue the tradition in 2025. Measuring 6-foot-3, 215 pounds, Jennings is a former high school dual-threat quarterback with a rugged game. He bullies his way past defenders, displaying outstanding strength and power with the ball in his hands. 
earsall is a slick route-runner with punt return experience at Florida (and Arizona State). Despite receiving limited snaps in 2024, the former first-rounder is an explosive player with the ball in his hands. While he lacks the size to run through defenders, the second-year pro flashes the speed, quickness, and burst to zip past defenders on crossers and diagonals. 

3. Keep the pocket clean for Purdy 
The 49ers’ much-maligned offensive line is seemingly in need of a makeover after a disappointing season in front of Purdy & Co. The leaky pass protection often left the 6-foot-1 pinpoint passer under duress, while the inconsistent push in the running game hindered the 49ers’ potential play-action aerial attack. 

While most of the focus has been on who will eventually succeed Trent Williams on the edge, the 49ers believe in their developmental process under offensive line coach Chris Foerster. The veteran has a knack for transforming unheralded players into solid starters in an exotic smash-mouth system that features a "plug-and-play" element for runners and blockers. Much like longtime running backs’ coach Bobby Taylor has consistently discovered and developed late-round running backs into gems, the 49ers are counting on Foerster to transform a collection of low-cost free agents, developmental prospects, and reclamation projects into an upper-echelon front line. 

Although the results were disappointing last season, the cost-effective approach will enable the 49ers to absorb Purdy’s big-money contract while acquiring premium assets at marquee positions. Moreover, the budget-conscious plan will help the 49ers stick to the blueprint (dominant running game + explosive play-action aerial attack + suffocating defense = wins) that has made them perennial title contenders in the NFC. 
With the 49ers committed to giving Ben Bartch, Dominick Puni, Austen Pleasants, Spencer Burford and Andre Dillard chances to carve out roles as short-term and long-term starters, the Faithful needs to trust the process when it comes to the development and improvement of the O-line.  

There's also the matter of 36-year-old Trent Williams, who returns after missing more than half of last season. The 49ers will soon have to find an eventual successor to ensure Purdy rarely deals with chaos from the blindside. Whether the team invests in a high-priced free agent or utilizes a top pick to add a franchise-caliber tackle to the mix, the 49ers must prioritize finding a premier edge blocker to protect their hefty investment in their young QB1. 

4. Draft and develop a championship-caliber defense 
After dropping $265 million on Purdy to secure the most important position on the team, the 49ers must commit to building a championship defense with a collection of young, cheap defenders surrounding a couple of stars in the lineup. With Nick Bosa and Fred Warner established and paid like superstars, the 49ers have committed to the "draft-and-develop" process for the foreseeable future. 

The team selected defenders with their first five selections in the 2025 NFL Draft and added six total defensive stalwarts to a unit that seeks to re-emerge as a disruptive force under former and new defensive coordinator Robert Saleh. The former New York Jets leader has successfully developed a host of young defenders throughout his time as a head coach and coordinator; the 49ers’ desire to build a championship defense through the draft hinges on his developmental skills. 
As the 49ers attempt to incorporate Mykel Williams (EDGE, Georgia), Alfred Collins (DT, Texas) Nick Martin (DL, Oklahoma State), Upton Stout (CB, Western Kentucky) and C.J. West (DT, Indiana) into a lineup that needed upgrades, particularly along the front line, the combination of personnel and coaching could produce spectacular results between the lines. 

As Purdy’s big money begins to put a dent in the cap in 2026, the 49ers will need to lean on younger players to balance out the books. With Saleh’s history of crafting top defenses with newbies dotting the lineup, the 49ers’ commitment to a "draft-and-develop" model should help the team effectively manage a roster that features a quarterback commanding big money. 

5. Kyle Shanahan must avoid the temptation to justify Purdy’s contract
Despite the questions surrounding the 49ers' decision to reward their franchise quarterback with a contract that puts him near the top of the market, the team cannot deviate from the successful blueprint that keyed Purdy’s success. As an efficient passer with a pass-first point guard mentality, the former seventh-round pick has been a perfect fit in an offense directed by a schematic wizard. Shanahan’s brilliant play designs and timely playcalling make it easy for the fourth-year pro to string together completions and produce "explosive" plays on carefully scripted deep shots. 
Looking at Purdy’s spectacular 2023 campaign (69.4% completion rate, 4,280 pass yards, 31:11 touchdown-to-interception ratio, and 113.0 passer rating), it coincided with CMC leading the NFL in rushing yards (1,459), scrimmage yards (2,023), and combined scores (21). Given the two-time All-Pro’s impact, the 49ers should not depart from a successful blueprint that puts the franchise quarterback in a supporting role with the RB1 leading the way. 

While the money suggests Purdy should carry the offense as the NFL’s newest member of the "$50 Million Club," the 49ers are at their best when the QB1 operates like a high-end game manager if his role remains the same within an offense that is loaded with blue-chip players around him. 


Myles Garrett on Aaron Rodgers: 'Good opportunity to put him in the graveyard'
Updated Jun. 10, 2025 6:51 p.m. GMT-4
share
re on link
link
Quarterback and four-time NFL MVP Aaron Rodgers is officially a member of the Pittsburgh Steelers. A player that he'll be seeing at least twice next year, Cleveland Browns superstar defensive end Myles Garrett, is pumped — but probably not for the same reason that Rodgers is.

"I think it's a good opportunity to put him in the graveyard," Garrett responded on Tuesday when asked what his reaction was to 
 signing with the Steelers, according to ESPN.

So, there's that.

In 2021, it was revealed that Garrett had a Halloween-themed graveyard on his front lawn of all the quarterbacks he had sacked or was planning to take down.

After originally requesting a trade in February, Garrett, a four-time All-Pro and six-time Pro Bowler, signed a four-year, $160 million extension ($123.5 million guaranteed) with the Browns, with his $40 million average annual salary breaking the NFL record for a defensive player.

Last season, Garrett totaled 14.0 sacks, an NFL-high 22 tackles for loss, three forced fumbles and 47 combined tackles. He ranked second among edge defenders in pass-rush grade (92.8) and overall grade (92.3) and 11th in run-defense grade (78.4), according to Pro Football Focus. It marked the seventh consecutive season that Garrett registered double-digit sacks.

As for Garrett's chances of putting Rodgers in the dirt, the defensive end has 13.0 sacks and four forced fumbles in 14 career games against the AFC North-rival Steelers. Garrett has faced off against Rodgers once, with the veteran quarterback's then-Green Bay Packers getting a 24-22 win at home on Christmas Day in the 2021 season. Garrett finished with one combined tackle.

Pittsburgh inked the 41-year-old Rodgers to a base one-year, $13.7 million deal earlier this month. He was released by the New York Jets after two seasons in March. Last season, Rodgers totaled 3,897 passing yards, 28 passing touchdowns, 11 interceptions and a 90.5 passer rating, while completing 63.0% of his passes in a 5-12 season for New York.

Garrett's first chance to end Rodgers once and for all will be on Oct. 12, when Pittsburgh hosts Cleveland. The two teams split their 2024 regular-season series, with them each winning on their respective home turf.

One player each NFC team should add to fill its biggest need
Published Jun. 11, 2025 8:00 a.m. GMT-4

Free agency frenzy has come and gone. So has the 2025 NFL Draft. NFL teams are busy going through the final phase of their offseason programs and their rosters are all but set until training camps open at the end of July.

Now that we have a decent idea of what each team is working with, ask not what they have, but what they don’t.

These are each NFC team’s biggest needs going into the summer lull — and potential players that are still available to fill those needs.

RELATED: One player each AFC team should add to fill its biggest need

NFC East
Dallas Cowboys
Biggest need: Cornerback

There’s a real chance Trevon Diggs doesn’t play for the Cowboys this season, and if that’s the case, they need cornerback help badly.

New York Giants
Biggest need: Offensive line

There are a lot of needs on the Giants’ roster, but the most dire of them is still probably the offensive line — especially with an aging veteran at quarterback in Russell Wilson, assuming he ends up being the starter. Andrew Thomas is an excellent tackle, but the line doesn’t have much else going for it and Thomas will likely miss a couple of games here and there.

Potential acquisition: Brandon Scherff

Philadelphia Eagles
Biggest need: Safety

This is incredibly nitpicky, but for the purposes of this exercise, I had to identify a position, OK? The Eagles roster is loaded thanks to the beautiful mind that is Howie Roseman, so we’re really talking about depth here. Safety is a place I’d like to see more of it. That’s all.

Potential acquisition: Julian Blackmon

Washington Commanders
Biggest need: Safety

The Commanders added Will Harris this offseason as their box safety, but I still have my questions about Quan Martin, if we’re grasping at straws here. At the very least, I don’t think a veteran would hurt in that room.

Potential acquisition: Marcus Williams

NFC North
Chicago Bears
Biggest need: Safety

I know a lot of people in Chicago still want the Bears to add to their running back room, but the Bears themselves don’t seem to be too concerned about it. They allowed J.K. Dobbins to remain a free agent as they embarked on mandatory minicamp last week and now Dobbins is a Bronco. Instead, I think Chicago should insulate against injury with Jaquan Brisker making his way back from a concussion that kept him out of a significant portion of the 2024 season. Brisker said he’s good to go after "retraining his nervous system" last week, but it can’t hurt to add secondary depth, regardless.

Potential acquisition: Jordan Whitehead

Detroit Lions
Biggest need: Edge rusher

Yes, the Lions are getting Aidan Hutchinson back, but coming off injury, they should try to make his return as easy on him as possible. That is, not making him shoulder the load too much too soon. Detroit is also relying on the health of Marcus Davenport on the other side of the defensive line even with Hutchinson healthy. That hasn’t worked out in recent seasons, so getting another guy off the edge can’t hurt.

Green Bay Packers
Biggest need: Edge rusher

While Jaire Alexander’s release probably makes it so cornerback is top of mind, that hasn’t been the biggest complaint of Packers fans this offseason. Why can’t Green Bay get pressure up front? Xavier McKinney masked a lot of the pressure issues last season with his takeaways, but imagine if there was a real-deal pass rush to go along with his ball-hawking skills?

Potential acquisition: DeMarcus Walker

Minnesota Vikings
Biggest need: Cornerback

I think if I asked ChatGPT what the Vikings biggest needs are, it would struggle to come up with anything. This roster is stacked on both sides of the ball and the only question mark is their young, inexperienced quarterback. That’s why I'd go to the defensive side and try to shore up the secondary. It never hurts to insulate from injury, as good as the Vikings’ corners can be.

Potential acquisition: Rasul Douglas

NFC South
Atlanta Falcons
Biggest need: Defensive tackle

The Falcons did some work defensively this offseason, but they could still use some help up front defensively. They let Grady Jarrett walk in free agency and haven’t really made up for his departure.

Potential acquisition: Raekwon Davis

Carolina Panthers
Biggest need: Cornerback

The Panthers' roster isn't bad? Looking through it, they have talent on both sides of the ball. I think they could still benefit from some secondary help, though, specifically outside corner.

Potential acquisition: James Bradberry

New Orleans Saints
Biggest need: Defensive line

The Saints need to get younger, and that includes all along the defensive line. Getting a veteran isn’t the most conducive solution, and they did already address it in free agency adding Davon Godchaux. I still think they need more, though, and maybe get a free agent on the younger side.

Potential acquisition: Raekwon Davis

Tampa Bay Buccaneers
Biggest need: Linebacker

The Bucs' roster still looks great. Their lines are good on both sides of the ball. They look primed to contend for the division yet again. The only major question mark is that middle level of the defense. Lavonte David continues to defy conventional aging and is still a high-level player, but he’s shouldering the majority of the load there. K.J. Britt is now gone and SirVocea Dennis will step up. I think a veteran insurance policy at inside linebacker is probably a good idea, even if it’s not ultimately needed.

Potential acquisition: Krys Barnes

NFC West
Arizona Cardinals
Biggest need: Offensive line

I like a lot of what the Cardinals did this offseason. I love that they invested in Trey McBride. But I don’t know if the offensive line measures up to what they want to do offensively. I’d like to see more competition. Maybe bring back a familiar face once he’s healthy?

Potential acquisition: Will Hernandez

Los Angeles Rams
Biggest need: Tight end

This was another tricky one because the Rams have only been ascending. They have a great offense with Matthew Stafford still at the helm, but I think coach Sean McVay could do some more fun things with tight ends if he had more of them.

Potential acquisition: Jonnu Smith

San Francisco 49ers
Biggest need: Safety

The Niners had a defensive exodus this offseason but were able to account for a majority of their losses. The one place they haven’t quite gotten to par? Safety. Add another veteran in that room and I think it would go a long way.

Potential acquisition: Marcus Williams

Seattle Seahawks
Biggest need: Offensive line

If it wasn’t for Caleb Williams taking 68 sacks last year, we’d have been talking about the 50 Geno Smith took a lot more. The Seahawks know offensive line is still a weak point, and I’d expect them to add more to that unit come training camp.

Potential acquisition: Chukwuma Okorafor

 Carmen Vitali is an NFL Reporter for FOX Sports. Carmen had previous stops with The Draft Network and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers. She spent six seasons with the Bucs, including 2020, which added the title of Super Bowl Champion (and boat-parade participant) to her résumé. You can follow Carmen on Twitter at @CarmieV. 

Want great stories delivered right to your inbox? Create or log in to your FOX Sports account, follow leagues, teams and players to receive a personalized newsletter daily.

Bookmakers respond to Aaron Rodgers signing with collective yawn
Late last week, news broke that Aaron Rodgers would finally sign with the Pittsburgh Steelers. 

The 41-year-old QB followed up by inking a one-year, $13.65 million contract Saturday.
And bookmakers responded with a collective yawn.

At most sportsbooks, the Steelers’ Super Bowl odds didn’t move an inch. That’s because any moves were made months ago, anticipating the Rodgers signing.

"It was the worst-kept secret in sports," Caesars Sports vice president of trading Craig Mucklow said Wednesday.

Bettors are generally nonplussed, as well. Mucklow serves up his insights on Rodgers’ impact — or lack thereof — in multiple NFL odds markets.

Middle of the Pack

In early February, Caesars Sports opened Pittsburgh as a +7000 long shot in Super Bowl odds. Right after the Super Bowl, and with Rodgers rumors already in motion, the Steelers shortened to +5500. In early March, the number moved to +4000.

It’s been stuck there ever since, 16th among the 32 NFL teams.

"We’ve only written about 2% of tickets on the Steelers," Mucklow said, while noting the Steelers are a liability for the book, but only due to their longer odds. "They are a winner for the customers. They’re not the biggest loser for us, though."

Mucklow likes the Steelers, but he’s tempering his expectations, even with a lock Hall of Famer now at quarterback.

"I would like to see the Steelers do well. They’re a popular team, and I’m a huge fan of Mike Tomlin," Mucklow said. "Do I think they can improve? Yes. But with Rodgers, I’m just mindful that Father Time usually wins that race."
Long-Shot MVP

Caesars waited until after Rodgers’ signing before adding him to the NFL MVP odds market. So it’s only been a few days, but action so far is tepid on the Steelers’ new quarterback.

"We’ve written a couple tickets on Rodgers at +6000. He’s a good result for the book," Mucklow said.

Interestingly, Caesars’ biggest MVP concern just departed Pittsburgh.

"The best result for customers and our worst liability is Justin Fields, whom Rodgers just replaced in Pittsburgh," Mucklow said.

Last season, Fields started six games for the Steelers. He’s now QB1 with the New York Jets, Rodgers’ team of the past two seasons.

In another awards market, even an attractive long-shot number isn’t luring Rodgers action.

"We haven’t written a single ticket on Rodgers as NFL Offensive Player of the Year, at 150/1," Mucklow said.

If you’re feeling frisky, then a $100 bet at those +15000 odds would return a $15,000 profit, should Rodgers have a bang-up season and win the award.

The Tomlin Effect

There’s at least one market in which Caesars is seeing positive action on the Steelers: season win totals.

"There’s a lot of interest in Over 8.5 wins. That’s not necessarily because of Rodgers but because of Tomlin, who’s never had a losing season," Mucklow said.

Indeed, in 18 years at the helm, Tomlin has 15 winning seasons and finished 8-8 three times. With a 17-game schedule, 8-8 is no longer possible. The Steelers went 10-7 each of the past two seasons.

Myles Garrett on Aaron Rodgers: 'Good opportunity to put him in the graveyard'
Updated Jun. 10, 2025 6:51 p.m. GMT-4
share

Quarterback and four-time NFL MVP Aaron Rodgers is officially a member of the Pittsburgh Steelers. A player that he'll be seeing at least twice next year, Cleveland Browns superstar defensive end Myles Garrett, is pumped — but probably not for the same reason that Rodgers is.

"I think it's a good opportunity to put him in the graveyard," Garrett responded on Tuesday when asked what his reaction was to Rodgers signing with the Steelers, according to ESPN.

So, there's that.

In 2021, it was revealed that Garrett had a Halloween-themed graveyard on his front lawn of all the quarterbacks he had sacked or was planning to take down.

After originally requesting a trade in February, Garrett, a four-time All-Pro and six-time Pro Bowler, signed a four-year, $160 million extension ($123.5 million guaranteed) with the Browns, with his $40 million average annual salary breaking the NFL record for a defensive player.

Last season, Garrett totaled 14.0 sacks, an NFL-high 22 tackles for loss, three forced fumbles and 47 combined tackles. He ranked second among edge defenders in pass-rush grade (92.8) and overall grade (92.3) and 11th in run-defense grade (78.4), according to Pro Football Focus. It marked the seventh consecutive season that Garrett registered double-digit sacks.

As for Garrett's chances of putting Rodgers in the dirt, the defensive end has 13.0 sacks and four forced fumbles in 14 career games against the AFC North-rival Steelers. Garrett has faced off against Rodgers once, with the veteran quarterback's then-Green Bay Packers getting a 24-22 win at home on Christmas Day in the 2021 season. Garrett finished with one combined tackle.

Pittsburgh inked the 41-year-old Rodgers to a base one-year, $13.7 million deal earlier this month. He was released by the New York Jets after two seasons in March. Last season, Rodgers totaled 3,897 passing yards, 28 passing touchdowns, 11 interceptions and a 90.5 passer rating, while completing 63.0% of his passes in a 5-12 season for New York.

Garrett's first chance to end Rodgers once and for all will be on Oct. 12, when Pittsburgh hosts Cleveland. The two teams split their 2024 regular-season series, with them each winning on their respective home turf.

Shedeur Sanders shrugs off lack of 1st-team reps at Browns minicamp
Published Jun. 11, 2025 8:14 p.m. GMT-4
share

For the first time in his football career, Shedeur Sanders is at the bottom of his team's depth chart. However, that doesn't mean that the Cleveland Browns' rookie quarterback isn't practicing and preparing the same way. 

Sanders, who the Browns took in the fifth round of the 2025 NFL Draft, believes that he's handling his situation as Cleveland's unofficial fourth-string quarterback "real well." 

"I would say it’s just a mindset, this adjustment. You got to go and understand the situation that you’re in and be able to approach that and get the best out of it," Sanders told reporters following the Browns' first mandatory minicamp practice on Tuesday. "You could view things as you’re not getting reps in a negative way, or you could view it as, OK, when is my time to get out there? Let’s be proactive, let's get warm and let’s get going.

"So, there's no excuses because when you get out there, nobody cares how many reps you got whenever you get in the game. Nobody cares if you took a snap before. Everybody cares about production. So that's the main thing when you get out there: You got to be able to produce."

Following Day 2 of Browns minicamp on Wednesday, Joe Flacco, Kenny Pickett and third-round rookie Dillon Gabriel split first-team reps. Sanders' reps during the offseason program came with the backup units, but he saw his workload increase as Flacco's reduced.  

On the final snap of Tuesday's practice, Sanders connected with Luke Floriea on a skinny post route while under pressure. Another highlight came during a 7-on-7 drill, when he threw a deep ball up the right sideline to Gage Larvadain with cornerback Dom Jones in coverage.

Sanders seemed to carry the momentum into Wednesday's practice. He statistically outperformed Cleveland's other three quarterbacks, unofficially completing 8 of 9 passes with a touchdown during team drills, according to ESPN Cleveland. Flacco completed 3 of 7 passes (one touchdown), Pickett completed 6 of 11 passes (one touchdown) and Gabriel completed 9 of 16 passes (two touchdowns), according to ESPN Cleveland's unofficial stat tracking at Wednesday's practice.

Shedeur Sanders shines early, but still no first-team reps — Could he still start as a rookie?
Oops
Geoblocked: Invalid or unknown DMA
As Sanders has seemingly impressed during the team's offseason program, Browns head coach Kevin Stefanski stressed to not look to deeply into who is getting first-team reps and who isn't.

"It's the offseason. It's OTAs, so we're going to keep the focus there," Stefanski told reporters on Wednesday. Once you get into training camp, of course, you're getting ready to play games and ultimately getting ready to play the season. But right now, that's not our focus."

Following Wednesday's practice, Sanders was seen putting in extra work, spending an extra 15 to 20 minutes on passing drills. Another big adjustment for Sanders is trying to get through his progressions quicker so that he avoids sacks. Sanders was sacked 94 times over his last two seasons at Colorado, the most by a quarterback in the Football Bowl Subdivision, and that contributed to his drop in the draft.

"It’s definitely going through the progressions and getting comfortable and knowing the ins and outs of everything. So, when you go on the field, I already have a different type of confidence by myself, regardless," he said, adding that when training camp begins, "I’ll be there."
Stefanski said going through progressions is a bedrock of offensive efficiency, but mastering that skill can take time.

"Being able to get through a progression is not as easy as it sounds. Your eyes are studying the defenders and seeing what they’re doing, and then ultimately, you’re listening to your feet," Stefanski said. "To quote an old Gary Kubiak line, ‘You have a prescribed drop for a play, and that drop, and those hitches will take you where the ball is supposed to go.’"

While some Browns fans would love to see him start the Sept. 7 opener against the Cincinnati Bengals — or soon thereafter — Sanders said his goal is just to become as polished as he can.

"I got time to be able to grow and mature and be able to understand the ins and outs of the defenses and be able to get the good insight from the vets in the room," he said. "So, I look at it as a plus. I got time to actually be able to really have a great understanding. And whenever, you know, it’s time for me to play, then it’s time for me to play.

"But I’m not looking too far in the future about all that. I’m looking about every day in practice because I had some misses out there today that, you know, we got to go in there and correct, reads getting in and out drops a little bit faster from under center. So that’s the main thing. I’m focused on the small things, and over time, the big things will happen."

Browns mincamp will conclude on Thursday. After that, the team will break for over a month before returning for training camp in July. 

 2025 NFL odds: How will Aaron Rodgers, DK Metcalf mesh in Pittsburgh?
Published Jun. 9, 2025 3:48 p.m. GMT-4
The QB-WR duo of Aaron Rodgers and DK Metcalf could be a match made in heaven for the Steelers this season.

Rodgers recently landed in Pittsburgh on a one-year, $13.7-million deal after spending the past two seasons with the New York Jets (2023-24), following an 18-year run with the Green Bay Packers to start his career (2005-22). 

Now, the 41-year-old four-time NFL MVP joins the Steelers for his 21st season after a whirlwind offseason.

The Seahawks traded Metcalf to the Steelers in March after he spent the first five years of his career in Seattle (2019-24). In Pittsburgh, he signed a five-year contract worth $150 million.

So, how will Rodgers mesh with two-time Pro Bowl wide receiver?

Let's check out Rodgers' and Metcalf's odds for the 2025 season at DraftKings Sportsbook, as of June 9.
Although he missed the entire 2024 season with an Achilles injury, Rodgers was solid last season in New York, throwing for 3,897 yards and 28 touchdowns against 11 interceptions. 

The Jets got off to a 2-3 start before firing then-head coach Robert Saleh. Rodgers played better down the stretch, but New York finished 5-12 and missed the playoffs for the 14th straight year. 

That said, Rodgers became the fifth player in NFL history to throw 500 regular-season touchdown passes in the season finale.

Pittsburgh is hoping Rodgers has enough left physically to go with a football IQ that remains elite. 
How signing Aaron Rodgers answers the Steelers' QB questions
Oops
Geoblocked: Invalid or unknown DMA
Elsewhere, the Steelers' organization is hoping that the addition of Metcalf, 27, will bring some stability and, hopefully, maturity to a wide receiver room that has lacked both as of late.

The imposing 6-foot-4, 235-pound wideout has become one of the most dynamic and reliable receivers in the NFL. He has never finished with fewer than 900 receiving yards in a season, and the 48 touchdowns he caught over six seasons in Seattle are third on the franchise’s career list. He tallied 6,324 receiving yards for the Seahawks over that span.

Metcalf joins a wide receiver group that includes 12-year veteran Robert Woods and third-year player Calvin Austin III.

"I’m a physical receiver, you know, big shout out to my pops," said Metcalf, whose father played guard and tackle for the Chicago Bears in the mid-2000s. "So he instilled that in me, and I just try to play the game a different way."

Will Howard 'fired up' to learn from Aaron Rodgers as his backup QB
Updated Jun. 11, 2025 7:03 p.m. GMT-4
share

Prior to Rodgers officially signing a one-year deal with Pittsburgh on Saturday, the Steelers were set to rely on unproven and inexperienced play-callers such as Mason Rudolph and rookie Will Howard. If they hadn't landed Rodgers, those two might have been using this current minicamp period as a battleground for the starting job.  

Instead, the veteran Rodgers will offer a source of consistency on the field and take those younger gunslingers under his wing, to potentially leave the franchise in a better place than when he got there.

Howard, especially, has potential. He led Ohio State to a College Football Playoff National Championship victory in 2025 before Pittsburgh selected him in the sixth round of April's NFL draft. 

"Will's a good kid," Rodgers told reporters on Tuesday during his first media availability in Pittsburgh. "I'm going to be with him every single day, in every single meeting … I'm going to help him out as much as I can."

Rodgers has a lot to offer. The 41-year-old is entering his 21st year in the NFL, and has two MVPs and a Super Bowl victory to show for it. But, before accomplishing any of that, he found himself in the same spot as Howard is now — backing up a Hall of Famer. 

Rodgers spent the first three years of his career with the Packers backing up Brett Favre. He had to put aside his ego and learn from one of the game's great quarterbacks. That experience put him in a position to succeed. Then, after earning the starting job in 2008, he led Green Bay on a Super Bowl run two years later.
Howard recognizes the valuable opportunity, as well.

"I’m fired up," he said Tuesday about learning from Rodgers. "He’s a guy I grew up watching, idolizing. It’s cool to be in the same room as him. He’s a legend in this game. I’m gonna try and learn as much as I can from him and be the best support guy I can be for him. It’s amazing."

Barry Sanders working to raise awareness after suffering a heart attack last year
A year ago, Hall of Fame running back Barry Sanders announced that he had been through a health scare, but did not provide any details. Today Sanders revealed that he suffered a heart attack.

Sanders is now urging people to get a complete medical checkup to monitor their own heart health.

“Of all things, I don’t know why, that just never entered my mind,” Sanders told CBS Sports. “I’m learning through this process that there aren’t necessarily any warning signs, unless you do what we’re encouraging people to do, which is to go the doctor, get tested for LDLC levels, or bad cholesterol. That’s the only way to find out if you have high cholesterol. It’s not something you’re going to be able to feel. You don’t have to fit a certain physical profile.”

Sanders appears in a documentary, The Making of a Heart Attack, that airs Saturday on A&E.

“It’s really been an education, for me, learning about how frequent this happens all over the U.S.,” Sanders said. “Conversing with these other individuals who are part of this documentary who have very insightful, gripping stories about the journey that they’ve been on. It’s just really amazing. I think it will get a lot of people’s attention.”

An all-time great like Sanders discussing his health problems will definitely get people’s attention, and may save lives if it spurs more people to get the checkups that so many of us put off.

Daniel Jones touts “productive spring” in learning, understanding Colts offense
With Anthony Richardson’s shoulder issue sidelining him until some point during training camp, Daniel Jones has an opportunity to solidify himself as the frontrunner in the Colts’ quarterback competition.

But asked about that on the last day of Indianapolis’ minicamp, Jones deflected, not making too much out of it.

“I think it’s like you would in any situation, just trying to prepare and grow with it every day,” Jones said in his press conference. “I’ve got a lot of work to do, just learning this offense and getting used to it, so I’m trying to focus as much on that and then playing good football when I’m on the field at practice.”

Jones, 28, was the No. 6 overall pick in 2019 and has seen just middling success with the Giants — winning just three games in 16 starts over the last two seasons. But he has made a positive impression with his new team, displaying some comfort in the offense during the offseason program.

“Building up reps, the preparation we do in the meeting room, the installs, being detailed and specific about our reads,” Jones said of what’s enabled him to be decisive in getting the ball out. “Where we need to be looking at where the receivers are going to be — how we’re seeing certain looks. So, I’ve really enjoyed that part of the learning process, and feel like that’s helped on the field. But I’ll continue to learn and grow in my understanding of this offense, and how to execute it. But yeah, I think it’s been a productive spring from that standpoint.”

Still, with Richardson going down, Jones noted that he needs to be ready, regardless of whether another quarterback is available.

“Yeah. I mean, I think that’s always got to be your approach, really at any position in the NFL — just preparing to play and be ready to go,” Jones said. “Like I said, there’s been plenty to work on and stay busy with from my standpoint, and learning the offense and getting here, learning the guys, building relationships with everyone. There’s been plenty to do, so I’ve just been trying to focus on that.”

In 10 games for the Giants last year, Jones completed 63.3 percent of his passes for 2,070 yards with eight touchdowns and seven interceptions.

Bears explore sale of minority stake in team
The Chicago Bears could be undergoing an ownership change.

Minority ownership, but it’s nevertheless rare for the Bears to have any equity available for purchase.

Via Bloomberg News, the Bears are currently exploring the sale of the minority interest held by Andre McKenna Sr., who died in 2023. Galatioto Sports Partners have been hired to handle a potential sale.

As noted by Bloomberg, the Halas/McCaskey family and/or team investor Pat Ryan likely hold a right of first refusal. However, with franchise values mushrooming, the McKenna share could attract a number that can’t or won’t be matched.

In 2024, the NFL opened the door for private-equity investments in franchises. The Bears could pursue that avenue, or look for an individual to purchase the available equity.

Most Important Backup QB Situations That Could Define NFL Season
The NFL will feature 32 starting quarterbacks at the onset of the 2025 campaign. Not all 32 teams will have a starting-quality option in place and a few will almost certainly experience upheaval at the game's most important position throughout the season.

A year ago at this time, the Minnesota Vikings weren't settled at quarterback, rookie Drake Maye wasn't scheduled to start for the New England Patriots, the San Francisco 49ers' Brock Purdy was still recovering from a serious elbow injury and the Cleveland Browns thought they were set behind center.

Potential injuries aside, significant turnover will occur that can change the direction of multiple franchises.

The Indianapolis Colts are already experiencing a possible succession before the season even begins, with Anthony Richardson still dealing with a shoulder issue. The 2023 No. 4 overall draft pick could bounce back in time for training camp, or Daniel Jones can take the job outright.

The following six teams find themselves in an odd predicament where they're already behind in a QB-driven league and the projected starter may not turn out to be the best-case scenario. However, a potential solution in any of these situations could drastically change their and the NFL's outlook.

The Atlanta Falcons field a different setup than everyone else on this list, because the organization believes it already has its long-term solution in place with Michael Penix Jr. while keeping a proven starter in Kirk Cousins on the roster.

The latter situation could change, of course, but Cousins has resigned himself to being the team's backup option.

"Obviously you'd love to play but I’m not (going to) dwell on things that aren't reality," the 36-year-old told reporters at Atlanta's mandatory minicamp. "It's better (time) spent to focusing on the situation you're in and control what you can control. I think that's the right mindset to have. Certainly there were conversations in January, February, March and even April but we're moving forward timeline-wise."

Based on the situation as it's currently constructed, Penix must show he really is the guy. He flashed during his first season, though he only started three games. The expectation is he'll be the starter for his entire sophomore campaign.

However, something could happen or he could play poorly, thus placing Cousins back into the lineup after being benched last season.

The Falcons have won seven or eight games in four straight campaigns. Two solid options at quarterback—now that their roles are reversed, with Cousins acting as the bullpen relief—may be enough to push them beyond mediocrity into contender status.

But the very real possibility of the veteran being traded to help another quarterback-starved franchise still exists as well.

How desperate another organization is depends on a situation that has yet to materialize, and a deal will be dependent on compensation—both in trade value and how much the other team is willing to take on regarding Cousins' contract—while the signal-caller must approve of any agreement thanks to his no-trade clause.

Divergent paths remain plausible where Cousins could start in Atlanta again or not even be part of the team at the start of the 2025 season.
No quarterback situation is more volatile than the Cleveland Browns' current setup.

After publicly moving on from Deshaun Watson, though not being able to do so financially for another year or two, the organization now finds itself with four different starting options and no clear path forward with any of them.

Veterans Joe Flacco and Kenny Pickett are believed to have the inside track to start, though a pair of rookies are the most important parts of this particular equation.

Cleveland has grown into a veteran team that expects to win. Myles Garrett, Joel Bitonio, Wyatt Teller, David Njoku, Denzel Ward, Grant Delpit, Maliek Collins and Jordan Hicks aren't expecting a lost season where the team's only goal is to find a quarterback or lose enough to draft one highly next year, hence why Flacco and Pickett are likely to open the season behind center.

However, investments in a pair of rookies will likely define the team's entire campaign. Unless Flacco or Pickett somehow find an unexpected spark this fall, what happens with Dillon Gabriel and Shedeur Sanders matters the most.

The Cleveland front office thought highly enough of Gabriel to make him a third-round draft pick despite questionable physical tools, while Sanders presents the best raw talent of anyone on the roster. Both present much-needed upside. They will battle throughout every daily session to see who is more deserving of an opportunity if/when one arises.

While a mid-round rookie starting probably won't be in the Browns' best interests, that setup will provide clarity in one of two ways. Either Dillon or Sanders show they're capable of being a starter, or the team can move past both a year from now and again enter the quarterback market.

It's not an ideal solution, but it's the one that Cleveland finds itself in after the worst trade blunder in NFL history.
ardson
A transition from one starter to the next may already be happening in Indianapolis. The organization isn't ready to give up on Anthony Richardson, but it may have no choice in the matter.

The 23-year-old is dealing with an aggravation of the AC joint that he originally injured during his rookie campaign. A timetable for his return has not been given after he missed the Colts' mandatory minicamp.

"Not going to put a timetable for training camp on it, but when he does come back, we'll ease him into throwing and then we'll go from there," head coach Shane Steichen told reporters last week.

Prior to the injury, the Colts already planned for an open competition this summer between Richardson and Daniel Jones, who signed as a free agent. The former had the inside track to winning the job based on his immense potential. Availability is the best ability, though.

Meanwhile, Jones is taking full advantage of getting all the early first-team reps.

"Very pleased with what we got right now," Steichen said of the 28-year-old Thursday. "He's been doing a hell of a job. Really smart football player. Learned the offense very quickly. Making really good decisions out there through OTAs. Obviously want to carry that over to training camp, but he's done a really good job. Great command of the huddle, ultimate pro."

Jones, himself, is considered a first-round bust and is now with his third team in less than seven months. However, the Colts just need some consistency at quarterback.

Plenty of talent exists around the position. If Richardson can't find his way back onto the field and show marked improvement in short order, Jones could easily be Indianapolis' starting quarterback for the entire 2025 campaign.
The Minnesota Vikings find themselves in a similar situation as they did a year ago. They are hoping J.J. McCarthy becomes their franchise quarterback while another reclamation project may end up becoming the starter.

Last season, Sam Darnold's career rose from the ashes, and he finally resembled a franchise-caliber quarterback for the first time since the New York Jets drafted him with the third overall pick in 2018.

The 28-year-old was never pushed by McCarthy, whom the Vikings chose with the 10th draft pick last year, because he suffered a season-ending meniscus tear during the preseason.

The Michigan product is essentially a rookie entering his second campaign, while the Vikings flipped fifth-round picks to the Seattle Seahawks in order to bring in Sam Howell, who started 18 games during his three-year career.

Minnesota established a new standard last season by finishing with a 14-3 record. The team isn't going to let the quarterback position hold it back. McCarthy needs to show he can command the offense and provide a similar presence as Darnold did.

"I think (J.J.) is right where he needs to be right now," offensive coordinator Wes Phillips told reporters Wednesday. "And right where we thought he'd be. I don't think he'd come up here and say he mastered the offense. Every rep is a learning rep."

Vikings head coach Kevin O'Connell is considered a quarterback whisperer thanks to his history playing the position and serving as a personal coach.

If McCarthy isn't up to the task, Howell may get every opportunity to prove he was worthy of a high draft pick many assumed he'd be before falling in the 2022 class. Minnesota needs to get the most out of one of these young signal-callers.
The New York Giants were determined not to be pigeonholed into selecting a quarterback with this year's third overall draft pick. They didn't.

However, the approach didn't stop them from drafting a signal-caller who will eventually determine the team's path.

The Giants' brain trust brought in veterans Russell Wilson and Jameis Winston during free agency, then tripled-down by trading back into the first round to select Jaxson Dart with this year's 25th overall pick.

Wilson enters the situation with the expectation of being the starter, but this season is all about Dart and what he shows.

General manager Joe Schoen and head coach Brian Daboll might have bought themselves a little extra time with a first-round QB. Although they must show marked improvement after significant downturns in performance during the past two seasons.

Meanwhile, veteran Wilson, 36, can be the table-setter in the short term.

"Players have described a different energy around the team this spring, with the leadership from accomplished quarterback Russell Wilson cited as a tone-changer," Dan Duggan of The Athletic reported.

Beyond that point, the clock will be ticking for Dart's eventual insertion into the lineup. As seen in the last two seasons, neither Wilson nor Winston remain capable of significantly elevating the play of others around them.

Ultimately, the Ole Miss product will be moved into the lineup so New York can determine its long-term direction.

"Unless the Giants are scoring points and winning games at a surprising rate early in the season, it feels inevitable that they reach a point where it's time to see what Dart can do," ESPN's Dan Graziano wrote.
The Seattle Seahawks are a mirror image of the Minnesota Vikings.

Seattle is relying on Sam Darnold this year, after also investing in a draft pick with significant upside.

The Seahawks signed Darnold to a three-year, $100.5 million free-agent contract. Even so, some trepidation exists with the 28-year-old as to whether he'll play like the version who showed up last year in Minnesota or regress to his previous performance levels.

Seattle didn't go all-in with Darnold as its long-term starter, either. An escape hatch is built into his contract, where the team can release him next offseason with a June 1 designation and save $27.5 million of next year's $33.9 million salary-cap charge, per Over The Cap.

The Seahawks also selected Jalen Milroe in this year's third round. He is considered a work-in-progress because of inconsistencies found within his mechanics, footwork and accuracy.

At the same time, though, the Alabama product is an elite athlete with a big arm. So, Seattle's coaching staff already has a plan in place to utilize the rookie.

"[Head coach Mike] Macdonald has said Milroe will not be used in the same fashion as Taysom Hill, who was more of a tight end who did a little bit of everything," Michael-Shawn Dugar of The Athletic reported. "Milroe is a quarterback, Macdonald said, and will be used accordingly."

More importantly, the rookie is catching on quickly, which is excellent news for the Seahawks and how they may eventually pivot during the season depending on how the team is faring.

"He's earned that feeling of confidence right now," McDonald told reporters Wednesday. "He's earned that feeling going into the summer."

At some point, Milroe may be more than a gadget sub-package quarterback and make his way into the lineup if Darnold doesn't adjust well to his new surroundings.

7 Shocking NFL Trades That Would Impact Playoff Races in 2025
With minicamps ongoing, NFL teams are taking some of their first steps toward finalizing their rosters for the 2025 season. Teams will be able to carry up to 90 players until cut day on August 26, the date that clubs must trim down to 53 players.

While there isn’t likely to be many significant changes to rosters now that all the top free agents are off the market and the draft is in the rear-view mirror, there is still a chance for some blockbuster trades to shake up the league’s landscape.

Whether the injury bug bites during training camp or a team struggles out of the gate and quickly fades from contention, the potential for deals involving star players who will have a tangible impact on playoff races will only grow leading up to the trade deadline.

With that in mind, here’s a look at seven hypothetical trades that could shift the NFL’s power structure.
Atlanta Falcons receive: QB Spencer Rattler, 2026 fifth-round pick, 2027 sixth-round pick

New Orleans Saints receive: QB Kirk Cousins

The New Orleans Saints were dealt a devastating blow when Derek Carr informed the team he would be retiring due to a degenerative shoulder injury. With a new regime helmed by head coach Kellen Moore coming in with high hopes of turning this middle-of-the-road squad into a playoff contender, the quarterback position has to be improved in short order.

New Orleans is running out of options to fix a QB room that consists of second-round rookie Tyler Shough, Spencer Rattler and Jake Haener. If the club wants to compete in 2025, it must swing a trade for Kirk Cousins—the last remaining proven veteran who is realistically available.

Cousins has been mired in a battle with the Atlanta Falcons—the team that benched him late in the 2024 campaign in favor of rookie Michael Penix Jr.—for his freedom. Despite signing a blockbuster four-year, $180 million contract just over a year ago, Cousins is hoping to escape Atlanta and sign with a team that could utilize his services at this late stage of his NFL career.

While Cousins wants out, the Falcons have made it clear they won’t outright release him and are willing to pay the nearly $28 million he’s owed for the upcoming season to work as their backup.

If the Saints are going to spring Cousins free, they’ll likely need to take on a large portion of his guaranteed money. For an organization with just $29 million in available funds, such a move is far easier said than done. It's especially tricky given Cousins represents a major upgrade to one of Atlanta’s division rivals.

Still, the Saints could find a way to orchestrate a deal and instantly elevate themselves into contention. If they offer the right mix of financial benefits, draft capital and a replacement backup, the Falcons could ship Cousins to New Orleans to finish out his career.
Cincinnati Bengals receive: 2026 second-round pick

Buffalo Bills receive: Edge Trey Hendrickson

The Cincinnati Bengals have been mired in a series of contract disputes with some of their biggest stars over the last few seasons. The latest negotiations with Trey Hendrickson don’t appear to be going well and could result in the elite edge-rusher being shipped off rather than retained on an extension.

Hendrickson is still highly productive despite going into an age-31 season. He’s earned Pro Bowl nods in each of his four Bengals campaigns, including in 2024 when he posted a second consecutive 17.5-sack season that earned him first-team All-Pro honors and a second-place finish in the Defensive Player of the Year race.

That may be the last glimpse of him in a Bengals uniform, as Hendrickson has maintained he will not suit up for the club without a new deal in place. If Cincinnati’s brass cannot reach an agreement that keeps the eight-year veteran in place, Hendrickson should garner plenty of interest in the trade market.

The Buffalo Bills would be a fantastic fit for the edge rusher. The team is in need of more pass-rushing prowess, especially with offseason acquisition Joey Bosa already dealing with injuries that have kept him out of practice.

While the Bills have been burned by blockbuster edge defender acquisitions in the past—Von Miller recorded a meager six sacks over his last 25 games in Buffalo after signing a six-year, $120 million deal with the club—Hendrickson could buck that trend as a slam-dunk pickup.

While Buffalo doesn’t have much to offer in terms of draft capital, it doesn’t appear that teams are champing at the bit to send the Bengals a Day 1 pick for Hendrickson.

If Cincy is willing to come down on a lofty asking price, the Bills shouldn’t hesitate to send over a Round 2 pick to add one of the best sack creators of the past half-decade and bolster their Super Bowl aspirations.
Miami Dolphins receive: 2026 third-round pick, 2026 fourth-round pick

Arizona Cardinals receive: WR Tyreek Hill

The Miami Dolphins and Tyreek Hill have been headed toward a split since an ignominious end to last season. After quitting on the team in the finale and telling reporters “I’m out bro” after missing the playoffs for the first time in his decorated nine-year career, Hill at least issued an apology to his teammates shortly after.

That may not be enough, however, especially after the wideout regressed significantly last season. Hill didn't breech the 1,000-yard receiving mark and missed the Pro Bowl for the first time ever, failing to earn a spot on the All-Pro team after two consecutive appearances.

Moving on from Hill represents significant cap savings for a Dolphins team that could be trending toward a rebuild.

Hill’s contract calls for him to earn $27.7 million in guaranteed salary this season, but cutting or trading him would result in a manageable dead money hit of just $12.8 million. It would also free up nearly $15 million in immediate cap room.

With the ‘Phins sitting on just $14 million in available cap space—the sixth-lowest in the league—a breakup makes plenty of fiscal sense.

The Arizona Cardinals are a potential landing spot for Hill. The team is on the rise under head coach Jonathan Gannon, going from 4-13 in his first season to 8-9 last year. The receiving corps still needs a jolt, however, as Arizona avoided making any major splashes in free agency or the draft at the position.

While the Cardinals have a foundational pass-catcher in Marvin Harrison Jr. to build around for the long haul, adding Hill would give quarterback Kyler Murray the weapons he needs to contend in wide-open NFC West races this coming year and over the next few seasons.

Los Angeles Chargers receive: 2026 fifth-round pick

Detroit Lions receive: Edge Khalil Mack

If the Los Angeles Chargers fall flat out of the gate this season, it wouldn’t be too much of a surprise to see them start selling off impact veterans who could affect the postseason race with their new team.

Khalil Mack fits the bill as a pricy veteran in the twilight of his career who can still make key contributions. He’s earned Pro Bowl nods in each of the last three seasons—including in 2023 when he notched a career-high 17 sacks—and the Bolts rewarded his consistent efforts with a one-year, $18 million extension back in March.

While Mack will be even more critical after L.A. parted ways with longtime pass-rusher Joey Bosa this offseason, he’s going into an age-34 campaign and doesn’t figure into the club’s long-term plans. If the Bolts are staring down a lost season, dealing him to a contender desperate for a backfield disruptor could be the best option for both parties.

The Detroit Lions could be the perfect landing spot for Mack. The team needs to add some juice on the edge to take the heat off star sack artist Aidan Hutchinson, and Mack could be the ideal player to give opposing offenses fits.

It won’t be easy for the Lions to absorb Mack’s $18 million salary, but the front office would be remiss to not find a way to fit the star under the cap. L.A. would benefit financially as well, receiving $8 million in immediate cap relief in exchange for incurring $10 million in dead money.

Injuries—including a season-ending broken leg for Hutchinson—caught up to Detroit last year and cost the organization a chance at its first Lombardi Trophy. Adding more depth and another elite option like Mack to ease Hutchinson’s burden is exactly what this roster needs to make a Super Bowl push.
Cleveland Browns receive: 2026 fifth-round pick

Los Angeles Chargers receive: TE David Njoku

Longtime Cleveland Browns tight end David Njoku has been up-and-down throughout his tenure with the club. While he’s been relatively productive and impactful when healthy, injuries cost him six games last year and he hasn’t participated in a full season since his sophomore campaign back in 2018.

Njoku is only two years removed from his finest season, a Pro Bowl 2023 in which he put up career-high marks of 81 receptions, 882 receiving yards and six touchdowns. While he was on pace to put up similar marks last season, he finished with a 64/505/5 stat line after missing six games due to injury.

With Njoku now entering a contract year, the Browns could opt to move on from the 28-year-old—especially if rookie tight end Harold Fannin Jr. looks ready to step into a prominent role right away. The third-round pick put up a Division I-leading 117 receptions and 1,555 yards at Bowling Green and has the potential to continue posting big receiving numbers at the next level.

The Los Angeles Chargers should come calling if Njoku is up for grabs. The team desperately needs to improve its tight end situation after failing to land an elite prospect in the 2025 draft and currently has an unexciting veteran duo of Tyler Conklin and Will Dissly set to handle most of the work at that position this season.

Adding Njoku into the mix would round out L.A.’s blossoming passing offense and potentially make it a force.
Miami Dolphins receive: 2027 seventh-round pick

Los Angeles Rams receive: CB Jalen Ramsey

It’s only a matter of time before Jalen Ramsey is no longer a member of the Miami Dolphins.

The team made the decision to move on from the veteran cornerback earlier in the offseason and shopped him during the draft. While a trade didn’t materialize at the time, it’s exceedingly unlikely Ramsey will still be with the team by the start of the regular season.

While Ramsey is only entering the second season of a three-year, $72 million extension he signed less than a year ago, his impact on the field has been diminishing.

After missing seven games in his first Miami campaign but still earning a Pro Bowl nod, he returned to start all 17 games in 2024. Ramsey wasn’t nearly as impactful as he had been in the past, posting just 11 pass defenses and two interceptions—his fewest since 2020.

The Los Angeles Rams have been heavily linked to Ramsey and it’d be surprising if he doesn’t end up with the team he spent three-and-a-half fruitful seasons with between 2019 and '22. The veteran-laden club is coming off a narrow loss to the eventual champion Philadelphia Eagles in the playoffs and is gearing up for at least one more Super Bowl push with aging quarterback Matthew Stafford at the helm

The availability of Jaire Alexander following his release from the Green Bay Packers might cool Ramsey’s market a bit, but the seven-time Pro Bowler should still have enough left in the tank to be a meaningful piece of an elite secondary.

If the Rams are willing to ship over a late-Day 3 pick for his services, it should be enough to get a deal done.
Denver Broncos receive: 2026 fourth-round pick, 2027 seventh-round pick

New York Jets receive: WR Courtland Sutton

If the Denver Broncos can’t rekindle the magic of 2024, the team could become sellers ahead of the trade deadline. One candidate to be sent packing is Courtland Sutton, the polarizing wide receiver now entering the final year of his contract.

Sutton has yet to earn an extension despite posting the best statistical performance of his career last season. The seven-year veteran appeared in all 17 games and caught 81 of his 135 targets for 1,081 yards and eight touchdowns. It was just the second 1,000-yard campaign of his career and the first since a Pro Bowl sophomore season back in 2019.

Injuries and inconsistency have plagued Sutton for the majority of his NFL journey, one that could be further negatively impacted in 2025 due to the presence of Devaughn Vele.

Vele, an unheralded seventh-round pick last year, is turning heads at training camp and appears to be the heir apparent to Sutton’s No. 1 receiver role. With him waiting in the wings and still having three seasons left on a dirt-cheap rookie deal, Sutton could soon find himself expendable.

The New York Jets could be very interested in Sutton’s services if he’s made available.

The club needs to find a running mate for top wideout Garrett Wilson after the failed Davante Adams experiment lasted just 11 games. With Josh Reynolds and Allen Lazard currently penciled in as the potential starters alongside Wilson, Gang Green would be wise to make a run at Sutton.

The receiver would provide far better support than new quarterback Justin Fields’ current options after Wilson and gives the squad a better chance of making a postseason foray.

Travis Hunter's Prep for Playing Both Sides at NFL Discussed by Jaguars HC Liam Coen
Travis Hunter has been hard at work going into his rookie season thanks to a plan put in place by the Jacksonville Jaguars coaching staff that will prepare him to play on both sides of the football.

Appearing on Thursday's episode of The Pat McAfee Show, Jaguars head coach Liam Coen explained the team had Hunter do on-field work with the offense and defense during the final day of mandatory minicamp to build up his "mental and physical endurance" before they reconvene for training camp next month.
Coen also noted the Jaguars' plan involved Hunter meeting with defensive coaches on days when he did on-field drills with the offense, and vice versa, to make sure he was staying on top of things.

When the Jaguars originally drafted Hunter by trading up for the No. 2 pick, Coen told reporters they envisioned him starting out playing primarily on offense while learning and practicing defense throughout their offseason program.

Hunter's work with the defense really started to ramp up during their OTA session on May 22 after he spent most of rookie minicamp and the first few days of OTAs doing receiver drills.

Based on the highlights from the Jaguars on social media, Hunter seems to look comfortable when he is lined up at cornerback.
Hunter is taking on a difficult task that really hasn't been tried by any player in the NFL on a full-time basis in several decades. Deion Sanders' most extensive use at wide receiver was in 1996 when he caught 36 passes for 475 yards as a receiver and made the All-Pro first team as a cornerback.

The Jaguars will almost certainly keep a close eye on Hunter's snap counts throughout training camp and preseason to avoid overloading him before the regular season.

It's going to be fascinating to what Hunter bring his unique ability to the NFL. The Jaguars made a big bet on him as a key player for their future by trading a 2026 first-round pick in the package to move up.

Hunter won the 2024 Heisman at Colorado after racking up 1,258 receiving yards and 15 touchdowns, as well as four interceptions and 11 pass breakups.

The Evolution of Football Equipment
When watching football, it’s easy to take for granted that the equipment utilized by the participants is the same as it has always been, standing ready to protect the players from the tough physical demands of the game.

But as much as we know the game of football, it has changed from its origins as a rugby-like affair in the late 1860s to the modern game we know in 2013. The equipment designed to shield the competitors has also been completely transformed within the 144-year history of the game.

The following slideshow tracks this historic transformation by chronicling the evolution of six of the major components of football equipment from their individual debuts right up until how they look and perform in today’s version of the game.

As a tasty bonus, not only do we look at how the equipment has changed but we identify why each evolution took place; whether it was spurred on by injury, technological advancement or mere aesthetic desires.

The Helmet
1 of 6
When “football” first began being played in the United States it was indeed called football, but it looked far more similar to the game of rugby that had been imported to collegiate fields from across the Atlantic from England.

This means that there were no players wearing headgear when Princeton and Rutgers squared off for the first college football game in history in 1869.

It’s the 1890s before any consistent mention of head protection devices are found with at least a couple of sources claiming that the first in-game use of a “helmet” came during the 1893 edition of the Army Navy game in Annapolis.

The obvious reason for the helmet’s coming of age in football and its eventual technological transformation was and is injury prevention.

This scenario was spurred along as the game of American football changed from the rugby-like game of the 19th century to the game we know today; a slow but steady change brought on by a series of rule modifications introduced by the likes of Walter Camp.

Camp’s revolutionary ideas included introducing the snap, instituting the three-down and five system (which led to the four-down and 10 system), modifying the field size, allowing tackling below the waist, mandating the number of players on the line of scrimmage, etc.; all changes that ultimately separated “football” from “rugby” and also created a need for protective equipment.

Though some folks will still say that Rugby is still just as tough a game as American football—minus the over-the-top use of shielding equipment—consider the fact that 23 participants actually died playing college football in 1905 prior to rules being tweaked and defensive gear being introduced.

That said, helmets were not a mandatory piece of equipment in college ball until 1939, so before that time looking across a field on game day you were likely to see a sampling of bare heads and a wide variety of “helmets.”

The first helmets used in football were made out of leather straps or mole skin fused together to protect players who had a concern for their own safety.

These crude, handmade helmets, which didn’t even cover the entire head, gave way to the more familiar “ear flap” or aviator models we think of when we conjure up visions of the earlier editions of gridiron head protection.

The idea of padding for comfort coupled with impact absorption toyed with in the early leather models was improved upon by Illinois coach Robert Zuppke, who led the Illini to a 131-81-12 mark from 1913-1941 including eight Big Ten titles and four national championships.

Other than the actual leather product stiffening and becoming more impact resistant over time, the next major advancement in helmet technology came in the 1940s when a Chicago sporting goods company by the name of Riddell patented the plastic football helmet.

Though the plastic helmet had its obvious early drawbacks (to keep things in perspective the mass production of plastics didn’t start in earnest until the 1930s and 40s), its emergence spelled the end of the era of the leather helmet.

Once the technology for plastics and synthetic materials ramped up adequately the helmet began to take the shape of the modern head gear we are more familiar with today.

This progression included the introduction of the wide array of color and logos that modern helmets offer, but this certainly doesn’t mean that players didn’t paint their headgear even in the earliest days of football.

In fact, the iconic styling of the University of Michigan's helmet actually follow the original lines on the Wolverine’s once-leather helmets, thereby connecting present day equipment with the far-off past.

Other than displaying school spirit, players also painted their headgear for more functional means in the early days, as once the forward pass was introduced in 1906 QBs could spot their receivers downfield more easily with a distinctly different colored helmet.

In the early 1970s Riddell set the standard once again by introducing it’s HA series of helmets that featured vinyl pads inside the helmet that could be filled with air to further absorb impact and facilitate a more custom fit.

Riddell’s Revolution Speed helmet is now the standard in the game and though plastic is still stuff headgear is made of, science continues to formulate new variations that perform better at lighter weights both inside and outside of the helmet.

The Facemask
2 of 6
The historical origins of the facemask as it pertains to a football helmet are a lot more difficult to determine than the other components on our list.

The problem here is that as long as guys have been putting helmets on and playing football, they’ve been getting socked in the mouth or the face.

And as long as they’ve suffered some sort of injury to the face, they’ve fashioned some sort of mask and tried to rig it up to their helmet and Voilà...they’ve invented the facemask.

Prior to the actual facemask football players back in the 1920s wore some fairly scary looking nose guards either with or without a helmet to protect their faces.

These medieval-looking apparatuses obviously made playing football uncomfortable and as they went out of fashion, rapidly, guys either went without face protection or they fashioned their own “masks” crudely attaching them to their leather helmets.

Though many folks are credited with some sort of rubber-covered wire mask earlier, the first purpose-manufactured mask came in 1953 when Riddell made an apparatus for Cleveland Brown QB Otto Graham.

Graham’s mask was a Lucite shield but it’s important to note, again, that it wasn’t truly the “first” facemask in football.

The Lucite shield was a disaster due to its propensity to shatter upon impact leading to it ultimately being banned by the powers that be at the NFL.

This led to Riddell’s BT-5 helmet which featured the iconic single bar facemask, officially opening the floodgates for the double-bar style and then any number of configurations of bars over the next 50 years.

Facemask technology, like that of helmets, is constantly being improved by advancements in synthetic materials.

As a sidebar, college football and the NFL didn’t introduce the facemask penalty until the late 1950s when the use of facemasks had adequately caught on in the game.

The Shoulder Pads
3 of 6
The concept of protecting the upper-body in the game of American football actually predates the idea of protecting the head, an approach that either highlights the difference between the rugby style of play in the late 1800s and today’s game or is simply a sign of the times.

Either way, the “invention” of shoulder pads in football is credited to one L.P. Smock, a Princeton student who is said to have designed the pads in 1877, eight years after his school faced Rutgers in the first ever college football game.

The first pads are said to have been made of leather and wool and were sewn into the competitor’s jerseys as opposed to being worn as a separate piece of equipment.

The first set of “harnessed” shoulder pads, those pulled on over the head an attached at the chest, were introduced sometime after the turn of the century and were still made of leather but also utilized canvas.

Shoulder pads began to be manufactured from plastic materials in the 1960s and 1970s and as was the case in helmets, materials technology continued to mean that less substance could be used for more effective protection.

As the raw materials used to make shoulder pads changed, so too did the areas that the equipment covered.

Indeed, what was originally designed as padding for just the shoulders crept down to protect the upper torso including the ribs and upper chest, meaning that this piece of specific equipment evolved along with concerns over injuries in other parts of the body.

Though the transformation between the helmets of yesteryear and those of the modern era are no doubt striking, the change in shoulder pads over the last couple of decades represents what may be the biggest recent equipment evolution.

At least visually.

Bulky shoulder pads that made a player look cumbersome and hulking as recently as the 1990s have made way for more efficient padding that gives competitor’s a sleeker more athletic look in today’s game.

But the improvements are more than skin deep, as the advancements also mean better ventilation, enhanced mobility, increased comfort and better protection.

The Pants
4 of 6
Really, as far as the overall form goes, the pants have experienced the least change of any part of the equipment used to play the game of football.

Though the rugby-like game played back in 1869 featured players dressed like they were in a Civil War era street fight, the padded football pants became a part of the game as early as the 1880s.

The original material for the pants was canvas and the pads, though light, was sewn into the knee and thigh regions providing at least some measure of protection.

Hip padding came next, sometime before the turn of the century and though the material the pants and the pads were made of changed drastically over the years, the basic design has stayed the same for well over a century.

As is the case in the helmet, facemask and shoulder pads as new materials have become available the pads and the pants themselves have evolved from their inefficient canvas and wool predecessors to the nylon, foam rubber and other synthetic materials of today.

And, again, the results have included increased levels of player safety, mobility, ventilation and comfort.

The Shoes
5 of 6
Frankly, it’s hard to believe that the early athletes who competed in college football could run at all in the boot-like devices that they wore when the game was in its earliest stages.

The earliest football shoes weren’t much different than what a man would wear to work and even a shoe that might be termed “athletic” would seem more like a “girl dress shoe” to a pair of critical eyes from 100 years later.

What spurred on shoe technology was not safety, but the rise of the competitive nature of the game which went hand in hand with football becoming a popular spectator sport as the 20th century dawned.

Basically, players wanted to be prepared to play well in changing field conditions and so the concept of a better shoe with a cleat was born.

This idea was helped along by the popularity of the “other” football across the Atlantic—the one we in the US call soccer—which was wildly successful and led to a quicker reaction commercially speaking.

Cleat technology began with players attaching their own metal version of cleats to the bottom of their shoes which eventually led to manufacturers producing ready-made versions.

Again, it was other sports such as baseball and English soccer that preceded American football in terms of manufacturing advancements in removable cleats, improved materials, etc. Eventually, as American football swept the nation, the gridiron shoe caught up.

The football shoe went from its original boot configuration to a lower cut design, and as in the case of all of the other equipment components we’ve discussed, technology in terms of materials has changed how shoes are made and what they are made of.

Available to today’s players are lighter-weight shoes and a wide-array of cleats for different climate conditions and individual styles.

The Ball
6 of 6
Though not worn by an individual player or necessarily for his safety, the ball is perhaps the most essential element of the game of football.

Though our game of American football has its most traceable roots in English rugby, the ball we use and share with our neighbors across the Atlantic has ties to ancient Rome.

Indeed, the Roman ball games known as “harpastum” or “follis” shared similar rules to our modern adaptations of football, soccer and rugby and it purportedly used a ball with a pig bladder.

Not surprisingly, the game of rugby, which we’ve already established as the precursor to American football, uses a ball with a similar watermelon shape—only it’s larger, fatter and has less defined points.

The first ball used in American football in that very first game between Rutgers and Princeton was more of a round ball that wouldn’t hold its shape it all;

As far as the first leather football, it came in 1887 when a Boston Red Sox pitcher named Spalding produced the first leather ball complete with lacing.

Though the ball was still blunter on the ends, more like a rugby ball, Spalding’s ball marked the beginning of the shape of the football as we now know it.

Over time the football’s pointed ends became more pronounced and the body more streamlined by simple evolution and necessity rather than a dictated ruling.

This is one of the less discussed reasons why the forward pass was successfully launched in 1906 and became such a substantial part of the game we know today.

Another less known fact about the early ball is the fact that up until 1956 a white football was used for night games, making it easier for players to see the ball in the low lighting.

The brown ball with a white stripe replaced the all-white ball in ’56 and though the NFL eventually dropped the stripes from its ball, the collegians still use the striped pigskin as their game ball.

For those hungry for more tasty factoids, 1956 was also the year the NFL first added the facemask penalty to the rulebook linking the two pieces of equipment forevermore.

After a very auspicious beginning and years of inconsistencies, today’s footballs, at all levels, must meet precise size and weight standards to be considered official.

5 Underrated Rookies Who Can Make a Big Impact on 2025 NFL Season
Rookies spent rookie minicamp and the start of organized team activities acclimating to their surroundings. These young players are building momentum and learning what it means to be a professional football player.

While we take all of the shirts and shortened practices with a grain of salt, positive performances are like building blocks to the foundation of a successful transition to the NFL.

The next step is the training camp before the preseason and regular season. The rookies who are shining and building step by step are not the only big names.

Let's look at five underrated rookies who can significantly impact their new NFL franchises.

Jimmy Horn Jr., WR, Carolina Panthers

Jimmy Horn Jr. was a sixth-round pick for the Carolina Panthers. He was a reliable run-after-catch weapon when healthy for Colorado's offense. 

The 22-year-old joins a revamped wide receiver room with bigger, stronger playmakers. He brings a totally different skill set to the Panthers' offense as a dynamic and explosive playmaker who excels at getting the ball in space. 

Horn is a threat to turn short passes into bigger gains. He brings a deep speed element that has been missing for Bryce Young, albeit the quarterback needs to complete more than 38.6 percent of his passes traveling 20-plus yards in the air, per NFL Pro.  

Horn's most immediate impact should be felt on special teams as a returner. He can flip the field position for more favorable starts for the offense. His impact on the Panthers could be multifaceted in year one. 

Arian Smith, WR, New York Jets
Arian Smith led the Georgia Bulldogs in receiving last season. When selected in the fourth round, there were a few receivers available who most in the draft community would classify as "better." 

Nonetheless, the New York Jets were excited about Smith’s potential. This offense needs to find a consistent running mate opposite star wideout Garrett Wilson. 

They are entering a new era with a new quarterback and coaching staff. Smith brings elite top-end speed to gash defenses down the field. He has been improving his route running and space creation, and his speed has impressed head coach Aaron Glenn. 

The 23-year-old has been spending extra time working on the jugs machine this offseason to cure his case of the drops that plagued him last season at Georgia. If he can cut down on the dropped passes, his path to being an impact rookie will be more straightforward. 

Smith’s speed and explosiveness work well with manufactured touches, like jet sweeps, pop passes and wide receiver screens. This New York offense should be similar to the Detroit Lions', and Smith could share similar usage as Lions receiver Jameson Williams. 

The Jets are testing Smith out as a returner on special teams, finding more than one way to get the football in his hands and allow him to be an explosive playmaker. If his momentum transfers to training camp and the preseason, Smith will surely have a sizable impact on this Jets team. 
The Las Vegas Raiders' offseason should be categorized as a home run.

They found their present quarterback to help elevate their offense, hired a highly experienced coaching staff with Super Bowl experience, and they made great decisions during the draft. 

Their draft went under the radar, but it's time to shine the spotlight on it. Of course, Ashton Jeanty is the belle of the ball with the sixth overall pick. Chip Kelly finds his bell-cow running back to feed the ball in both facets of the offense.

They triple-downed on adding offensive weapons with wide receivers Jack Bech and Dont'e Thornton Jr. The latter finished as the B/R Scouting Department's 119th overall prospect on the pre-draft big board.

While Bech receives the fanfare, the highest ceiling belongs to Thornton. He’s a 6'5", 200-pound elite athlete and an explosive playmaker. His A-trait is winning the vertical plane and taking the top off the defense. His speed and stride are challenging to keep up with.

Per Mitchell Renz of the Raiders Report, he is beginning to receive reps with the first-team offense, which is a great sign and development.

Geno Smith is an accurate deep ball (20-plus air yards) passer, completing 41 percent of his passes—the seventh highest in the league in 2024, per NFL Pro. His effectiveness throwing down the field and outside the numbers meshes well with the explosiveness of Thornton.

There isn't another receiver on the Raiders roster with his skill set, abilities or body type. He should carve out a role, even if it’s a downfield specialist. His developmental upside is through the roof, and the Raiders should lean into ensuring he hits it.

If so, they have a potential star on their hands!
The selection of IOL Tate Ratledge was a necessary one for the Detroit Lions.

The 24-year-old started three seasons (37 games) at right guard at Georgia and was brought in by Detroit to compete with Graham Glasgow and Christian Mahogany for one of the starting guard spots. 

The sudden retirement of starting center Frankie Ragnow puts more onus on Ratledge's versatility. Since the veteran's departure from the team, the former Bulldog has played first-team center in the Lions' OTAs and is expected to control that position into the regular season. 

Jared Goff is not a mobile or creative quarterback. He thrives in structure and with protection from his offensive line. Mitigating the loss of Ragnow will not be easy, especially for a rookie. 

Ratledge plays with the grit, nastiness and physicality the Detroit offensive line thrives on. His athleticism and lateral agility will be assets in adjusting and adapting to NFL defensive rush schemes. 

As the expected starter, the No. 57 overall pick will be an impactful player on the Lions' offensive success and effectiveness overall if nothing changes. 
The Tennessee Titans added multiple pass-catchers in the fourth round of this year's draft. Multiple swings create more opportunities to hit one of the young receiving threats in hopes that someone will grow with No. 1 overall pick Cam Ward.

Elic Ayomanor was a top-100 graded prospect on our Scouting Department's pre-draft big board. He did not receive fanfare after being selected, but he has been making plays since rookie camp for the Titans.

I spoke with a source close to the team recently, and I asked specifically about the Stanford product's performance.

"Ayomanor is shining and projects to assume the X-receiver role in the offense. He's been learning from veteran Calvin Ridley, learning about route running and becoming a better player overall." the source said.

Ayomanor is among the few receivers on the roster with the requisite height, weight and talent to play as the boundary X-receiver. His ball skills at the catch point will offer Ward a different type of receiver than he's been accustomed to throughout his collegiate career.

The 22-year-old tracks the ball well and plucks it out of the air with strong hands, potentially showing a reliable red-zone threat.

Calvin Ridley is the unquestioned WR1 for the Titans offense while veteran Tyler Lockett mans the slot position, leaving the X-receiver spot up for grabs.

If Ayomanor takes his momentum from OTAs and minicamp into training camp, the role will be his to lose.

Arthur Smith Jokes Steelers Didn't Add Aaron Rodgers, DK Metcalf to 'Run the Wishbone'
Pittsburgh Steelers offensive coordinator Arthur Smith joked that the team didn't bring quarterback Aaron Rodgers and wide receiver DK Metcalf aboard just so they can run the wishbone.

"You'd love to be more balanced," Smith said, per ESPN's Brooke Pryor on Wednesday. "You're not obvious in how you want to attack this defense, what you think their strengths and weaknesses are. That's the game that's played every Sunday. ... we didn't bring Aaron in here—and signed DK [Metcalf] for all that money—to go run the wishbone. So, you know, you try to play to the strengths of your team."

The wishbone is a run-oriented offensive formation featuring four backs (one quarterback, two running backs and a fullback) that came to prominence at the University of Texas in 1968. Texas went from 6-4 pre-wishbone to 9-1-1 (and Cotton Bowl champions) in 1968 to national champions in 1969.

So it was a phenomenon that revolutionized the game then. It's certainly outdated now in 2025. However, Smith has been known to be more run-oriented when calling plays in the past. Of course, he had superstar Derrick Henry in the mix when he was the Tennessee Titans' offensive coordinator, so that made sense.

He loved the run when he was the Atlanta Falcons' head coach, with the team notably fourth in rushing play percentage in 2023 and second in 2022.

As Pittsburgh's OC in 2024, the Steelers were fifth in rushing play percentage. It wouldn't be a surprise to see that number go down, though, with Rodgers and Metcalf aboard.

The 41-year-old Rodgers is a four-time NFL MVP and 10-time Pro Bowler. His best days are likely behind him as he enters his 21st NFL season, but he's obviously still a capable quarterback, having thrown for 3,897 yards and 28 touchdowns last year for the New York Jets.

Metcalf is an explosive and fast downfield threat who has amassed at least 900 yards and five touchdowns in each of his six NFL seasons. He's WR1 in Pittsburgh as the Steelers look to make big strides on offense with Rodgers aboard.

Ultimately, Rodgers and Metcalf are the big stars on this offense, although the running game could impress with rookie Kaleb Johnson joining Jaylen Warren. Still, there's obviously no plans to run the wishbone as Pittsburgh potentially airs it out more with Rodgers under center and Metcalf catching downfield passes.

Shemar Stewart's Contract from Bengals Reportedly Has Same Language as Cards, Seahawks
Shemar Stewart's holdout from the Cincinnati Bengals due to some of the language they want to include in his rookie contract is reportedly a fairly common practice used by other teams.

Per The Athletic's Jayna Bardahl and Paul Dehner Jr., the default language in the Bengals' offer is the same the Arizona Cardinals and Seattle Seahawks used to sign their 2025 first-round picks (Walter Nolen and Grey Zabel, respectively).

Those deals are notable specifically because they are the two players picked around Stewart in the draft. Nolen was selected No. 16 overall by the Cardinals. Zabel went No. 18 to the Seahawks.

Pro Football Talk's Mike Florio reported in May the issue for Stewart is over "a phrase" the Bengals want to include that would cause a default in the current year to trigger a default in future years and potentially void some of the guaranteed money.

ESPN's Ben Baby added, "According to a source with knowledge of the negotiations, the sticking point is language in the contract that could void guaranteed money in future years. For example, if Stewart were suspended, even for an on-field reason such as leading with the crown of the helmet or other similar penalties, that could eliminate future guarantees."

Baby continued, "According to a source with knowledge of the negotiations, the Bengals have examined similar language for other rookies around the NFL and believe the contract is the standard rookie deal. But part of Stewart's disagreement is that the Bengals are trying to set a precedent with this year's draft class regarding void language and guaranteed money."

Stewart, the No. 17 pick, told reporters on Tuesday during the team's mandatory minicamp that he's "100 percent right" and isn't asking for anything they haven't given before.
Florio noted the Bengals didn't use this language with 2024 first-round pick Amarius Mims, nor was it included in the deals they did earlier this offseason with Ja'Marr Chase and Tee Higgins.

Jay Morrison of BengalsTalk.com noted Stewart has received support from his teammates.

Another reason this situation is different is that Stewart is also refusing to take part in on-field drills while he remains unsigned. There are four unsigned first-round draft picks, including Stewart, but the other three have taken part in offseason activities with their teams.

Dehner noted Stewart didn't sign the injury waiver to participate in mandatory minicamp. The Texas A&M alum also left mandatory minicamp early on Thursday because of his contract dispute.

The Bengals have a history of prolonged contract negotiations. They are also embroiled in a standoff with Trey Hendrickson, in addition to everything happening with Stewart.

Their mandatory minicamp ended on Thursday, so they won't reconvene until training camp begins in July. If they haven't resolved their issue with Stewart by that point, then there will be real reasons to panic for a Bengals team that needs all of the help on defense it can get.

Football Safety Equipment History—and Krausko’s Impact American football has always been a contact sport. As the sport exploded in popularity and players became more and more athletic, steps needed to be taken to increase safety. While injuries were once accepted as part of the game, organized football leagues have followed a gradual progression from baggy pants and no pads to full pads and plastic helmets with facemasks. Football safety equipment history follows this basic timeline In the 2000s, organized football leagues—led by the NFL’s example—have experimented with many variations of facemasks and padding styles. Extensive measures have been taken to attempt to limit short and long-term injuries. Helmets are now designed to prevent concussions, full pads reduce the impact of a tackle, and Krausko training equipment helps players learn to play safely.
Proper Training Equipment Promotes Safety
Of course, player safety relies on more than simply improving the equipment they wear on their bodies. Penalties are put in place to make players behave fairly. Not only do penalties keep players from cheating, but they protect defenseless players from needless harm. Roughing the passer protects the quarterback from late or reckless hits. Defenders are penalized for unnecessary blows to the head.

Safety also depends on proper football training drills teaching efficient and sportsmanlike technique. Proper training drills require the right equipment to do the job. We offer The Muzzle to teach offensive blocking techniques.

Rock solid technique can limit illegal actions such as clipping, holding, or tripping. Therefore, the chance of injury as a result of improper contact is limited. In order to teach the right technique, coaches have traditionally taught blocking methods using static dummies and sleds in practice. We have The Colt blocking pad with arms to teach better blocking technique.

Fatigue has disastrous potential in training. When players tire, their technique and fluidity lacks, increasing the chance of injury on account of uncoordinated movements. Players can use our blocking pads without wearing pads. With less weight to carry, players can increase their reps and decrease overall fatigue.

The Best Training Equipment Prepares Players for the Real Game
Krausko’s training system teaches legal, safe rushing and block shedding techniques better than any training equipment has before. Coaches wielding The Colt Pro naturally respond to a player’s movement. Based on the player’s technique, coaches can provide instant feedback about how well players execute drills.

Our blocking pads train players the technique necessary to simulate a safe, realistic game environment. They are the next step in the evolution of football safety equipment. Krausko’s training equipment is the best on the market for youth, college, and professional football teams. Take advantage of this opportunity to improve your team and win more games!

Check out our football equipment comparison chart to see how our training system is the best for your team.

Contact Krausko to order football training equipment for your team players.
Gridiron football players wear various pieces of equipment for the protection of the body during the course of a football game. Basic equipment worn by most football players include a helmet, shoulder pads, gloves, shoes, and thigh and knee pads, a mouthguard, and a jockstrap or compression shorts with or without a protective cup. Neck rolls, elbow pads, hip pads, tailbone pads, rib pads, and other equipment may be worn in addition to the aforementioned basics. Football protective equipment is made of synthetic materials: foam rubbers, elastics, and durable, shock-resistant, molded plastic. Football protective equipment has remained consistent in use for decades with some slight modifications made over the years in design and materials. The assignment and maintenance of football gear belongs to the team equipment manager.
The professional football helmet consists of several distinct parts: the shell, jaw pads and abdomen bladders, face mask, chin strap, and mouth guard. The shell is constructed of hard plastic with thick padding on the inside, a face mask made of two or more metal bars (usually two spaced far apart and a third close to the middle), and a chinstrap used to secure the helmet. Helmets are a requirement at all levels of organized football, except for non-tackle variations such as flag football. Although they are protective, players can and do still suffer head injuries such as concussion. Football helmets bear the logo of the team and the team colors. By the mid-1980s, the football helmet had become a complex, highly engineered piece of equipment. The inside of the helmets was lined with foam padding and plastic pods, or an inflatable layer designed to absorb the shock of impact and create as tight as fit as possible. In 1995. the football helmet went high-tech, when a new rule permitted quarterbacks to have a radio transmitter in their helmets, making it possible for a team’s coach to call in plays without the need for elaborate sideline semaphore.[1]

There are several styles of face masks and chin straps available. The selection is left to the player, with quarterbacks generally selecting more open masks with maximum visibility. Each position has a different type of face mask to balance protection and visibility. There are at least 15 different facemask styles. New design for the helmet includes an integrated faceguard featuring shock absorbing "Energy Wedges" that reduce the force of impacts to the faceguard.

A recent addition to the football helmet is a visor or eye shield, traditionally used to protect players from eye injuries or glare. Former Chicago Bears quarterback Jim McMahon was the first to wear a visor/shield. The visors started out as clear or smoked, but now come in colors ranging from blue, gold, black, rainbow, silver, or amber. The clear visor/shield is used at the player's discretion. The NFL requires medical clearance related to migraines and sun sensitivity for tinted, sunglass like, visors.[2] An exception has been made for players with Oakley sponsorships: The company's light pink tinted "Prizm Shield" visors may be worn. [3]

The helmet fitting process starts by measuring the player's head with calipers. Based on measurements taken, a helmet shell of the appropriate size and style is chosen. Then, padding is added to ensure that the helmet fits the player's head. Padding consists of both foam rubber pads and inflatable (air) pads. Both the top and side padding include inflatable bladders that customize the fit. Once the helmet is in place on the player's head, the inflator bulb is applied to two points on the outside of the helmet. The jaw pads are fitted to ensure that the lower part of the helmet is snug against the player's face. The helmets that most NFL teams use are remarkably light, and once the pads are in place, there is no movement or shifting on the player's head.

Radio
The first in-helmet radio transmitter was invented in 1956 by John Campbell and George Sarles, who approached then-Cleveland Browns owner Paul Brown to install a radio inside quarterback George Ratterman's helmet. It only resulted in game time interference, and was outlawed by then-NFL commissioner Bert Bell after only three preseason games.[4] The NFL allowed dummy communication in regular-season games in 1994, 38 years after the Browns' experiment. Rather than coaches calling a time-out in order to give a play to a quarterback, many of today's teams have opted for radios inside their quarterback's helmet. The helmets are set up with a small speaker in each ear hole. Quarterback coaches or offensive coordinators on the sidelines talk to the quarterback with a radio, giving him specific plays and options. Players from the "old school" might argue that this creates an unfair advantage, but proponents say that the radio helmets make for clear coach-to-player communication, even in large, noisy games like the Super Bowl.

NFL rules state that all helmets with a headset in them must have a visible green dot on the back. Since only the quarterback can have a wired helmet, it stops other players using the quarterback's helmet. A few times in 2006 the holder on the field goal attempt was told to pull up and throw or run at the last second because of a change the coaches saw on the field. This gave teams an "unfair advantage" in the eyes of the NFL. The new rules let each team know who is wearing a headset and who is hearing the plays being called.

In 2008 the NFL changed the rules to allow one player for the defense, usually a linebacker, but sometimes a defensive back, to wear a radio helmet with a green dot.[5]

In 2024 the NCAA updated rules to allow one player on the offense and one player on the defense to where a radio helmet, following rules similar to the NFL's with one major exemption, the radio is cut off when there are 15 seconds remaining on the play clock or when the ball is snapped, whichever comes first. The radio is not re-enabled until the end of that play.[6]

There are limitations to the radio helmet though since it can be distracting for players who are not used to them. Additionally helmets with speakers are generally more expensive than traditional helmets, and they require additional maintenance and care to ensure that the speakers and microphone are working properly.[7]
The shoulder pads consist of a hard plastic outer shell with shock-absorbing foam padding underneath. The pads fit over the shoulders and the chest and rib area, and are secured with various snaps and buckles. Shoulder pads give football players their typical "broad-shouldered" look, and are fitted to an adult player by measuring across the player's back from shoulder blade to shoulder blade with a soft cloth measuring tape and then adding 1/2 inch. For comfort, shoulder pads are sometimes worn in conjunction with a shoulder pads cushion of foam rubber over a cotton half-tee.

Shoulder pads accomplish two things for a football player: (1) they absorb some of the shock of impact through deformation. The pads at the shoulders are strung on tight webbing and deform on impact, and (2) they distribute the shock through a larger pad that is designed to regulate players' body temperatures during games and practices and also protects against injury.
A typical jockstrap used in football is constructed of a wide elastic waistband with a support pouch of cotton/elastic to contain the genitals. Two wide elastic straps affixed to the base of the pouch and to the left and right sides of the waistband at the hip complete the jock. The pouch, in some varieties, may be fitted with a pocket to hold an impact resistant cup (protective cup) to protect the testicles and penis from injury. Many youth football players, such as the Pop Warner leagues, are often required to wear a protective cup. However, they are now not worn as often at the high school, college, and peewee level, although still highly recommended.[8] The jockstrap is the one piece of equipment used in football that predates the sport itself. In 1874, Charles Bennett of the Chicago sporting goods company, Sharp & Smith, created the "bicycle jockey strap" for bicycle riders (or, bicycle jockeys as they were then known). Other athletes adopted the jockey strap in their sports. A mass marketing in 1902 claimed the garment, now termed a "small comforter" was "medically installed" for all males that engaged in sports or harmful activity.
Jerseys. The front and back of the jersey are usually nylon, with spandex side panels to keep it taut. The goal is to make it difficult for an opposing player to grab hold of the jersey and use it for leverage. To help this process: Jerseys have an extension at the bottom that wraps around from front to back to keep the jersey tucked in. Jerseys have a wide strip of Velcro at the rear that mates with Velcro inside the waistband of the pants. Many players apply two-sided carpet tape to their shoulder pads so that the jersey sticks to the pads. The players individually choose which of these features (if any) they will use. Each professional football player is usually equipped with a set of practice jerseys as well as four-game jerseys. Players will change jerseys at half time if it is raining. Jerseys will usually have a variety of patches affixed to the shoulders or other parts of the garment. Patches may depict the American flag, the team logo, or other significant information.

Pants. Pants are manufactured in nylon and mesh (for hot weather practices), and nylon and spandex for a tight fit (with team colors) for games. Most pants are manufactured with the traditional lace-up fly as a zippered fly is impractical and subject to damage due to stress in the rough and tumble of the game. The interior sides of the pants legs contain four individual pockets to hold two thigh pads (one for each leg) and two knee pads. The pads are placed in the pockets before the pants are put on in the locker room. The pants are secured with a belt, sometimes with a traditional metal buckle or with several rings. Game-used jerseys and pants are sports collectibles, with those of celebrity athletes realizing high sums.
Quilted hip pads date to the 1890s and are one of the earliest pieces of protective football gear known. Today, hip and tailbone pads are made of plastic and protect the hips, pelvis, and coccyx or tailbone. The pads are inserted into the pockets of a girdle worn under the football pants. Thigh and knee pads are made of plastics and inserted into pockets constructed inside the football pants.

Nose guard
In the days before helmets, players often wore nose guards or "nose masks" or "nose armor".[9] Football was a brutal sport before the introduction of helmets and other protective gear. Serious injuries and even deaths were common occurrences in the game. Harvard's All-American center, John Cranston, was the first player to wear equipment to protect his face during an American football game. In order to protect Cranston's "weak nose," Harvard captain and 1889 All-American Arthur Cumnock invented a device that he called "nose armor."[10] Cumnock's invention gained popularity, and in 1892, a newspaper article described the growing popularity of the device:

"By the invention of nose armor football players who have been hitherto barred from the field because of broken or weak noses are now able to thrust an armor protected nose (even though it be broken) into the center of the roughest scrimmage without danger to the sensitive nasal organ. The armor is made of fine rubber and protects both the nose and teeth."[10]

Percy Langdon Wendell later invented the most commonly used version of the nose mask.[9]

Gloves
Many receivers wear gloves that have sticky rubber palms, called tack gloves. Spray on sticky substances (such as Stick 'em) have been illegal since the 1980s. Linemen also wear gloves, for using their hands to fight off opposing linemen. The gloves worn by linemen usually are lined with very thick padding to better protect fingers and hands, which sometimes are caught in an opponent's face mask or are stepped on. Players are not permitted to put gels or "stick 'ems" on their gloves.
The role of an equipment manager has become an important one for football teams. The equipment manager has two main areas of responsibility: first, fitting each player on the team with a customized array of equipment that will provide maximum protection against injury, and, secondly, being responsible for the logistics of handling many pieces of equipment on a daily basis—keeping it repaired and in stock, and moving the equipment for road games.

American football, deeply ingrained in the cultural fabric of the United States, has undergone a remarkable evolution since its inception in the late 19th century. From its humble beginnings as a rough-and-tumble game played on muddy fields to the highly organized and technologically advanced sport we know today, the journey of American football reflects both societal changes and advancements in sports science and technology. Let's explore the fascinating evolution of American football and how it has shaped the game we love.

The Early Years: Leather Helmets and Gridiron Battles
American football traces its roots back to the mid-19th century, evolving from rugby and other similar games. In its early years, the sport was characterized by rough play, minimal protective gear, and a lack of standardized rules. Players wore leather helmets that offered little more than symbolic protection, and injuries were common.

Standardization and Safety Measures
As the popularity of American football grew, so did concerns about player safety. In the early 20th century, efforts were made to standardize rules and equipment to reduce the risk of injuries. Leather helmets were gradually replaced by hard-shell helmets, and protective padding became more widespread. The forward pass, introduced in the early 20th century, revolutionized the game, making it less reliant on brute strength and more strategic.

Television and the Rise of the NFL
The advent of television in the mid-20th century propelled American football into the national spotlight. The National Football League (NFL), founded in 1920, became increasingly popular, drawing millions of viewers and transforming players into household names. The merger with the American Football League (AFL) in the 1960s further solidified the NFL's dominance and paved the way for the modern era of professional football.

Technological Advancements in Equipment
The latter half of the 20th century saw significant advancements in football equipment technology. Helmets evolved to incorporate better shock absorption and improved facemasks for added protection. Shoulder pads became lighter and more flexible, allowing for greater mobility without sacrificing safety. The introduction of synthetic materials further enhanced the durability and performance of football gear.

Embracing Analytics and Sports Science
In recent decades, American football has embraced analytics and sports science to gain a competitive edge. Teams utilize advanced statistical analysis to inform strategic decisions, player evaluations, and game planning. Sports scientists work with athletes to optimize training regimens, reduce the risk of injuries, and maximize performance on the field.

The Future of American Football
As American football continues to evolve, questions about player safety, concussion prevention, and the long-term impact of the sport loom large. Innovations such as improved helmet designs, rule changes to minimize head injuries, and ongoing research into concussion management are shaping the future of the game. Additionally, advancements in technology, such as virtual reality training and biomechanical analysis, hold promise for further enhancing player development and performance.

Conclusion: A Dynamic and Ever-Changing Game
The evolution of American football is a testament to the sport's adaptability and resilience. From its rough-and-tumble origins to the highly orchestrated spectacle it is today, football has undergone remarkable transformations over the years. As we look to the future, one thing remains certain: American football will continue to evolve, driven by a combination of tradition, innovation, and a relentless pursuit of excellence on and off the field

The spirit of early football can be glimpsed in the introduction of a rule in 1894 that banned projecting nails or iron plates in shoes and any metal substance on the player’s person. Rules establishing boundaries between permissible and impermissible violence have been continually revised over the years, sometimes in response to periods of heightened concern over deaths and injuries (in the early 1930s as well as the 1890s, for example). To ensure greater safety, the number of officials grew from two in 1873 to seven by 1983. Over time, improvements in equipment also provided more safeguards against serious injuries. In the 1890s players’ only protection against blows to the head came from their own long hair and leather nose guards. The first headgear, in 1896, consisted simply of three leather straps. It evolved into close-fitting leather caps with ear flaps. The suspension helmet, which used straps to create space between the helmet shell and the head of the wearer, was introduced in 1917. However, helmets were not required in college football until 1939 (1943 for the National Football League). Improved equipment sometimes increased rather than curtailed the game’s dangers. The plastic helmet, introduced in 1939, became a potentially lethal weapon, eventually requiring rules against “spearing”—using the head to initiate contact.
In 1879 the University of Michigan and Racine College of Wisconsin inaugurated football in the Midwest. Michigan under Fielding Yost in 1901–05 and the University of Chicago under Amos Alonzo Stagg in 1905–09 emerged as major powers. The game also spread throughout the rest of the country by the 1890s, though the Big Three—Harvard, Yale, and Princeton—continued to dominate the collegiate football world into the 1920s. Ever mindful of their superiority to the latecomers, the three (joined by the University of Pennsylvania to create briefly a Big Four) formed the Intercollegiate Rules Committee in 1894, separate from the Intercollegiate Football Association. In 1895 in the Midwest, colleges dissatisfied with this divided leadership asserted their independence by forming what became the Western (now the Big Ten) Conference. The game also spread to the South and West, though conferences were not formed until later in those regions.

The brutality of mass play also spread through the nation; over the course of the 1905 season, 18 young men died from football injuries. Concerned that football might be abolished altogether, President Theodore Roosevelt in October 1905 summoned representatives (including Camp) from Harvard, Yale, and Princeton to the White House, where he urged them to reform the game. On December 28 of that year representatives from 62 colleges and universities (not including the Big Three, who would continue for decades to balk at submitting to the will of “inferior” institutions) met in New York to form the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States, which became the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in 1910. To reduce mass play, the group at its initial meeting increased the yardage required for a first down from 5 yards to 10 and legalized the forward pass, the final element in the creation of the game of American football. The founding of the NCAA effectively ended the period when the Big Three (and Walter Camp personally) dictated rules of play to the rest of the football world. It also ended student involvement in controlling the game, though the question of who should rule college football—coaches, alumni and boosters, or college administrators—would continue to bedevil the NCAA throughout its history.

Brutality did not end with the revised rules of 1906. New crises prompted additional rule changes in 1910 (requiring seven men on the line of scrimmage) and 1912 (increasing the number of downs to gain 10 yards from three to four) to eliminate mass play. Nor did the forward pass immediately transform the game. The restrictive 1906 rules made passes riskier than fumbles, and it was only after several years of cautious experimentation that Notre Dame’s upset of Army in 1913 highlighted the remarkable possibilities in the passing game. It would be another three decades, however—during which restrictive rules were gradually dropped and the circumference of the ball reduced to facilitate passing—before those possibilities could be fully realized.
Sport and spectacle
This early period in American football was formative in another way as well. Beginning in 1876, the original Intercollegiate Football Association staged a championship game at the end of each season, on Thanksgiving Day, matching the two best teams from the previous year. Initially the game was played in Hoboken, New Jersey, but in 1880 it was shifted to New York City to make it easier for students from all the universities in the association to attend the game. The attendance for that first contest in New York was 5,000. By 1884 it had climbed to 15,000; it rose to 25,000 by 1890 and 40,000 by 1893, the last Thanksgiving Day game to be played in the city. By this time, accounts of the game in New York’s major newspapers were taking up as much as three pages in an eight-page paper, and wire services carried reports to every corner of the country. By the 1890s an extracurricular activity at a handful of elite northeastern universities was becoming a spectator sport with a nationwide audience. College football became known for its bands and cheerleaders, pep rallies and bonfires, and homecoming dances and alumni reunions as much as for its athletic thrills. Pursuing the institution’s educational mission while serving the public’s desire for entertainment posed a dilemma with which college administrators struggled for more than a century. For some of the public, college football’s association with institutions of higher education and immersion in college spirit imbued the game with a kind of amateur purity. For others, the colleges’ profession of commitment to academic goals while commercializing their sports teams only smacked of hypocrisy.

College football’s golden age
After World War I had put the game temporarily on hold, college football fully came of age in the 1920s, when it became widely recognized as America’s greatest sporting spectacle (as opposed to baseball, which was the national pastime). The first football stadiums at Harvard, Yale, and Princeton were modeled on the ancient Greek stadium and the Roman Colosseum, their architecture revealing much about football’s cultural status. With a stadium-building boom in the 1920s, attendance more than doubled, exceeding 10 million by the end of the decade, and newspaper coverage of the sport expanded at a similar rate. The daily newspaper had played a crucial role in the 1880s and ’90s, introducing football to a popular audience with no connection to universities and their teams. Commercial radio appeared in 1920 and began regularly broadcasting football games a year later. By the end of the decade three networks were broadcasting a slate of games each Saturday, and local stations were covering all the home teams’ games. By 1929 five newsreel companies were devoting roughly one-fifth to one-fourth of their footage to football in the fall. General-interest magazines such as Collier’s and the Saturday Evening Post regularly published articles by or about famous coaches or players, along with short stories about the star who wins both the girl and the big game. Movie theaters each fall screened a handful of college football musicals and melodramas with kidnapped heroes who escaped just in the nick of time to score the winning touchdown.
In the 1920s and ’30s colleges and universities throughout the Midwest, South, and West, in alliance with local civic and business elites, launched campaigns to gain national recognition and economic growth through their football teams. They organized regional conferences—the Big Ten and the Big 6 (now the Big 12) in the Midwest; the Southern, Southeastern, and Southwest conferences in the South; and the Pacific Coast Conference in the West—and scheduled “intersectional” games with regional prestige at stake. The Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, on New Year’s Day, first contested in 1902 between Stanford and Michigan, then annually beginning in 1916, determined an unofficial national champion and was also a highly profitable commercial enterprise. Promoters in other Sun Belt cities developed rival bowl games—the Orange Bowl in Miami (1933), the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans (1935), and the Cotton Bowl in Dallas (1937)—eventually to be joined by so many others that the NCAA in the 1950s began to regulate them.

Knute Rockne and the influence of coaches
A distinguishing mark of American football is the renown and status granted to the most successful and innovative coaches. The first innovators were men such as Walter Camp (not literally a coach but an adviser), Amos Alonzo Stagg at the University of Chicago, George Woodruff at Pennsylvania, and Lorin Deland at Harvard, the coaches who developed the V trick, ends back, tackles back, guards back, flying wedge, and other mass formations that revolutionized, and nearly destroyed, the game in the 1890s. The most influential of the early coaches was Pop Warner, whose wingback formations (the single wing and the double wing), developed at Carlisle, Pittsburgh, and Stanford, became the dominant offensive systems through the 1930s.

Connected to a national audience through television—and under no obligation to build character or maintain educational standards—professional football became the most spectacular success story in the world of American sport over the second half of the 20th century. To an even greater degree than for college football, television became the professional sport’s lifeblood, with increasingly lucrative television contracts guaranteeing large profits for every club no matter how well it fared on the field. In the 1950s, while college authorities fretted over television, NFL commissioner Bert Bell embraced it immediately and won congressional approval to black out television coverage in the cities where home teams were playing. In a stroke, Bell’s efforts assured maximum attendance for the league’s 12 clubs with little impact on the size of the league’s rapidly growing TV audience.

The televised championship game between the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants in 1958, decided in sudden death overtime, is widely recognized as the turning point in professional football’s embrace by a national audience. When Bell died in 1959, he was succeeded by the general manager of the Los Angeles Rams, Pete Rozelle, who became the most powerful and most effective commissioner in American professional sports. In addition to creating NFL Properties, which became a multibillion-dollar enterprise, Rozelle negotiated a series of contracts with the TV networks that grew from $4.65 million for the 1962 season to nearly $500 million per year when he retired in 1989, guaranteeing more than $17 million per club before a single fan bought a ticket. Most crucially, Rozelle persuaded Congress to continue granting the NFL exemptions from the Sherman Antitrust Act, allowing franchises to operate not as individual businesses but as a single entity, each club sharing equally in league-generated revenues. (In 2010 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the Sherman Act did indeed apply to the NFL; by that time, however, the league had already established itself as the most powerful and profitable professional sports organization in the country.) Under Rozelle, the value of franchises increased from about $1 million in 1960 to more than $100 million in 1989, and under the structure he put in place the average value of a franchise exceeded $4 billion in the early 21st century.
The NFL faced competition from a new rival in 1960, when the American Football League (AFL), backed by Texas billionaire Lamar Hunt, fielded teams in eight cities, three of them in direct competition with NFL franchises. A television contract with NBC gave the AFL a financial security none of its predecessors had had, and the NFL and AFL agreed to a merger in 1966, completed in 1970 with 26 clubs in two conferences. The pass-oriented AFL brought more excitement to professional football, as well as the game’s most glamorous player, the New York Jets’ quarterback Joe Namath. Out of the merger also came the Super Bowl, which soon became the single most popular and lucrative of all sporting events in the United States. Super Bowl I (not yet with that name) was played between the Green Bay Packers and the Kansas City Chiefs after the 1966 season, with more than 40 percent of the country’s television sets tuned in to the two networks that broadcast the game. That percentage never dropped lower than 36, and it nearly hit 50 in 1982, as the game was eventually watched by as many as 130 million Americans in addition to a worldwide audience. The Super Bowl became a major civic ritual, as famous for its surrounding hoopla—including the halftime show—and million-dollar commercials as for the football games.

Showmanship on the field
Constant innovation held fan interest and kept it steadily increasing. Polls beginning in the early 1970s repeatedly identified professional football as Americans’ favorite sport. Over the 1970s and ’80s the NFL withstood the challenge of new rival leagues—the World Football League (1974–75) and the United States Football League (1983–85)—and invested in the Arena Football League (an indoor version of the sport that was played on a shortened field during the NFL’s off-season from 1987 to 2008 and again from 2010 in a new incarnation) and expanded into Europe in 1991 with the World League of American Football (later NFL Europe; disbanded in 2007). The African American athletes who increasingly dominated football also brought a new style to the game. The beginnings of end zone dances in the 1970s escalated into highly choreographed routines, followed by other attention-grabbing gestures by defensive as well as offensive players. These displays eventually led to rules against “excessive celebration” (in the NCAA as well as the NFL) and countercharges by African American spokesmen that the banned actions and gestures were not failures of sportsmanship but African American self-expression. However, these rules were relaxed in 2017. Fans were divided between enjoyment of the antics and criticism for the loss of old-fashioned values, but the new flamboyance played well on television, and it made football more than ever an arena in which Americans dealt with shifting attitudes about race.

Franchise shifts and free agency
The two events most responsible for shaping the NFL for the 21st century took place off the field: a series of legal decisions established free agency for players and gave owners greater freedom to move their franchises. The growth of television revenues inevitably led the players to demand a fair share of the profits. In 1970 a brief training-camp strike by the NFL Players Association (formed in 1956 but relatively inactive until the 1970s) caused no disruption of the football season but foreshadowed more serious labor-management disputes to come. In 1974 a 41-day strike during training camp affected only preseason games, as the Players Association capitulated. More serious and prolonged strikes in 1982 (when the players were locked out for 57 days and the season was reduced to nine games) and 1987 (when a strike lasted 24 days, leading owners to cancel one game and hire “replacement” players for three more) were equally unsuccessful from the players’ perspective but far more damaging to the image of the league.

A full quarter of the league’s veteran players crossed picket lines in 1974, and in 1982 and 1987 those who refused to strike or who criticized the union included some of the game’s top players. What the players lost on the picket line, they won in court, however, as a series of lawsuits finally forced the owners in 1993 to agree to free agency, with a salary cap (a limit on each club’s expenditures on salaries). With players now able to change teams, salaries increased dramatically—from an average of $490,000 in 1992 to $663,000 in 1993 and reaching more than $2.5 million by 2017—yet the clubs’ financial stability and the competitive balance among teams were preserved by the salary cap and the college draft, which the Players Association made no attempt to challenge.

The NFL’s other defeat in court benefited individual owners. In 1980 Al Davis, the managing general partner of the Oakland Raiders, successfully sued the NFL for not allowing him to move the Raiders to Los Angeles, where he expected to make considerably more money (after leaving in 1982, Davis returned the Raiders to Oakland in 1995). The freedom to move franchises without league approval gave owners a powerful position in negotiating with city governments that viewed an NFL franchise as an essential foundation of community pride and the local economy. Numerous franchise shifts in the 1980s and ’90s provoked local outrage but did not damage the league. At the turn of the 21st century, professional football was without question the most popular and the most profitable of American sports.The play on the field underwent continual innovation. Lacking the cachet of “college spirit,” the NFL since the 1930s had always placed greater importance on entertainment. The NFL formed its own rules committee in 1933 and immediately moved the goal posts to the goal line (to make field goals easier), liberalized the rules on passing, and spotted the ball 10 yards from the sidelines when it went out of bounds. (Until that time, the ball was placed at the sideline, and a play had to be wasted in order to move it to closer to the middle of the field.) Subsequent changes, in 1935 and 1972, eventually placed the ball even with the goal posts (the colleges made similar changes but settled on a “hash mark” one-third of the field’s width). As the new rules opened up play, the Chicago Bears under coaches George Halas and Ralph Jones, assisted by University of Chicago coach Clark Shaughnessy, reintroduced the old T formation, which eventually replaced the single wing as the dominant offensive formation. Quarterback Sammy Baugh and receiver Don Hutson elevated the passing game to new levels, while most college teams still played in a lower-scoring conservative style.

In the 1950s the Los Angeles Rams’ head coach Sid Gillman exploited the passing game as never before, but in the late 1940s and ’50s it was the Cleveland Browns’ head coach Paul Brown who revolutionized professional football with organizational principles that were eventually adopted throughout the football world. Brown made the watching of game films a part of the entire team’s preparation, placed assistant coaches in the press box, even experimented with implanting a radio transmitter in the quarterback’s helmet—a tactic quickly banned by the commissioner, not to be legalized for another four decades. Brown invented “pocket protection” for his quarterback, with the linemen not aggressively blocking, as on running plays, but dropping back into a pocket to shield the quarterback. Vince Lombardi extended this principle to running plays at Green Bay in the 1960s, having his linemen block areas rather than specific men and having the running back read which way his lineman blocked his man at the point of attack. The basic principle of brushing defensemen aside rather than overpowering them gave new flexibility to the running game.

College football gradually adjusted to the more pass-oriented professional style, and college and professional coaches after World War II borrowed from each other, always looking for ways to exploit an offensive or defensive advantage. The Southwest Conference had been known for its wide-open passing attacks in the 1930s, but college football remained fundamentally a power running game into the 1980s. College coaches’ most distinctive innovations in the 1970s and ’80s came in offenses that featured running quarterbacks—the triple-option schemes such as the wishbone and veer (with the quarterback handing the ball off to a fullback, pitching it to a tailback, or keeping it himself), offenses that were unattractive to the pros because they put quarterbacks at physical risk.
The original defenses had simply mirrored the positions of the offense. In the 1930s a 6-2-2-1 alignment became dominant (6 linemen, 2 linebackers, 2 cornerbacks, and 1 safety). In the NFL, to stop the increased passing that came with the T formation in the 1940s, the Philadelphia Eagles’ Greasy Neale developed the 5-3-2-1 defense, which was in turn replaced in the mid-1950s by the 4-3 (actually 4-3-2-2) perfected by Tom Landry as an assistant coach with the New York Giants. In this alignment the defensive tackles kept blockers off the middle linebacker, who became the dominant defensive player. The 4-3 defense made stars of such middle linebackers as Sam Huff, Joe Schmidt, Ray Nitschke, Dick Butkus, and Willie Lanier. The 4-3, in turn, yielded to the 3-4 in the mid-1970s, moving the emphasis to outside linebackers rather than the middle linebacker. The New York Giants’ Lawrence Taylor became the prototype outside linebacker in the 1980s, with tremendous speed to cover receivers and tremendous power to rush the quarterback. By the early 21st century both defensive alignments were in practice, with roughly equal use throughout the league.
Pass defenses had always been either man-to-man or zone (each back covering an area). In the 1970s, when zone defenses virtually eliminated long passes, strong running games—featuring backs such as Buffalo’s O.J. Simpson, Miami’s Larry Csonka and Jim Kiick, and Pittsburgh’s Franco Harris and Rocky Bleir—dominated the NFL. Landmark rule changes in 1977—banning defensive contact with wide receivers more than five yards downfield and allowing offensive linemen to block with their open hands—returned the advantage to the passing offenses. Small, quick offensive linemen gradually disappeared, replaced by 300-pound (140-kg) hulks who could hold off charging pass rushers with their extended arms and hands. (There were eight 300-pounders in the NFL in 1986 and 179 in 1996, and in 2010 the vast majority of linemen in the league weighed more than 300 pounds.) Led by the so-called West Coast offense developed by Bill Walsh for the San Francisco 49ers, the passing game flourished as never before (in 1980 there were more passing than running plays for the first time since 1969). Other coaches developed run-and-shoot offenses, no-huddle offenses, and one-back offenses (with four wide receivers and no tight ends). 