Basketball began with its invention in 1891 in Springfield, Massachusetts, by Canadian physical education instructor James Naismith as a less injury-prone sport than football. Naismith was a 31-year-old graduate student when he created the indoor sport to keep athletes indoors during the winters.[1] The game became established fairly quickly and grew very popular as the 20th century progressed, first in America and then in other parts of the world. After basketball became established in American colleges, the professional game followed. The American National Basketball Association (NBA), established in 1946, grew to a multibillion-dollar enterprise by the end of the century, and basketball became an integral part of American culture.

Early history
Invention of the game
A game similar to basketball is mentioned in a 1591 book published in Frankfurt am Main that reports on the lifestyles and customs of coastal North American residents, Wahrhafftige Abconterfaytung der Wilden.[2] Among other things, a game of skill is described in which balls must be thrown against a target woven from twigs, mounted high on a pole in the middle of a large playing field. There's a small reward for the player if the target is being hit.[3]

The game of basketball as it is known today was created by Dr. James Naismith in December 1891 in Springfield, Massachusetts, to condition young athletes during cold months. Naismith was a physical education instructor at YMCA International Training School (now known as Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts. Upon the request of his boss, Naismith was tasked to create an indoor sports game to help athletes keep in shape in cold weather.[1] It consisted of peach baskets and a soccer style ball. He published 13 rules for the new game. He divided his class of eighteen into two teams of nine players each and set about to teach them the basics of his new game. The objective of the game was to throw the basketball into the fruit baskets nailed to the lower railing of the gym balcony. Every time a point was scored, the game was halted so the janitor could bring out a ladder and retrieve the ball. After a while, the bottoms of the fruit baskets were removed.

The first public basketball game was played in Springfield, Massachusetts, on March 11, 1892.[4]

Naismith's original rules

An illustration of a basketball game that accompanied Naismith's article from The Triangle in 1892 listing his 13 rules.
There were only thirteen rules of "basket ball":

The ball may be thrown in any direction with one or both hands.
The ball may be batted in any direction with one or both hands.
A player cannot run with the ball, the player must throw it from the spot on which he catches it, allowance to be made for a man who catches the ball when running at good speed.
The ball must be held in or between the hands, the arms or body must not be used for holding it.
No shouldering, holding, pushing, tripping or striking in any way the person of an opponent shall be allowed. The first infringement of this rule by any person shall count as a foul, the second shall disqualify him until the next goal is made, or if there was evident intent to injure the person, for the whole of the game, no substitute.
A foul is striking the ball with the fist, violation of rules 3 and 4, and such as described in rule 5.
If either side makes three consecutive fouls it shall count a goal for opponents.
A goal shall be made when the ball is thrown or batted from grounds into the basket and stays there. If the ball rests on the edge and the opponent moves the basket it shall count as a goal.
When the ball goes out of bounds it shall be thrown into the field and played by the person first touching it. In case of a dispute, the umpire shall throw it straight into the field. The "thrower-in" is allowed five seconds. If he holds it longer it shall go to the opponent. If any side persists in delaying the game, the umpire shall call a foul on them.
The umpire shall be the judge of the men and shall note the fouls, and notify the referee when three consecutive fouls have been made.
The referee shall be the judge of the ball and shall decide when the ball is in play, in-bounds, and to which side it belongs, and shall keep the time. He shall decide when a goal has been made and keep account of the goals with any other duties that are usually performed by a referee.
The time shall be fifteen-minute halves, with five-minute rests between.
The side making the most goals in that time shall be declared the winner. In the case of a draw, the game may, by agreement of the captains, be continued until another goal is made.[5]
The first basketball game

The gymnasium where basketball was invented in the School for Christian Workers (now Springfield College), c. 1887
On December 21, 1891, Naismith published rules for a new game using five basic ideas and thirteen rules.[6] That day, he asked his class to play a match in the Armory Street court: 9 versus 9, using a soccer ball and two peach baskets. Frank Mahan, one of his students, was not so happy. He just said: "Harrumph. Another new game".[7] Someone proposed to call it "Naismith Game", but he suggested "We have a ball and a basket: why don’t we call it basketball?"[8]

The eighteen players were John G. Thompson, Eugene S. Libby, Edwin P. Ruggles, William R. Chase, T. Duncan Patton, Frank Mahan, Finlay G. MacDonald, William H. Davis and Lyman Archibald, who defeated George Weller, Wilbert Carey, Ernest Hildner, Raymond Kaighn, Genzabaro Ishikawa, Benjamin S. French, Franklin Barnes, George Day and Henry Gelan 1–0.[9] The goal was scored by Chase.[10] There were other differences between Naismith's first idea and the game played today. The peach baskets were closed, and balls had to be retrieved manually, until a small hole was put in the bottom of the peach basket to poke the ball out using a stick. Only in 1906 were metal hoops, nets and backboards introduced. In 1894 the soccer ball was replaced by a ball Naismith contacted Spalding to make.[11][12]

Women in basketball
Shortly after, Senda Berenson, instructor of physical culture at the nearby Smith College, went to Naismith to learn more about the game.[13] Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she started to organize games with her pupils, following adjusted rules.[14] The first official women's interinstitutional game was played just 11 months later, between the University of California and Miss Head's School.[15] In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. Thus, the sport quickly spread throughout America's schools, colleges and universities with uniform rules for both sexes.[16]

YMCA, U.S. Army spread development
YMCA had a major role in spreading basketball throughout the United States, Canada, and the world. In 1893, Mel Rideout arranged the first European match in Paris, in Montmartre. At the same time, Bob Gailey went to Tianjin, China,[17] Duncan Patton to India, Genzabaro Ishikawa to Japan, and C. Hareek to Persia.[18]

The First World War broke out in 1914, and the U.S. Army started fighting in Europe in 1917. During World War I, the American Expeditionary Force took basketball wherever it went. Together with the troops, there were hundreds of physical education teachers who knew basketball. Naismith also spent two years with YMCA in France in that period.[19]

Early professional leagues, teams, and organizations

A Spalding basketball from 1922
The first professional league was founded in 1898. Six teams took part in the National Basketball League, and the first champions were the Trenton Nationals, followed by the New York Wanderers, the Bristol Pile Drivers and the Camden Electrics. The league was abandoned in 1904.[20] Then, many small championships were organized, but most of them were not as important as some teams who played for money against challengers.

The Original Celtics, for instance, are considered the "fathers of basketball"[21] and were presented as "World’s Basketball Champions";[21] the players had to sign a contract to play with them, and Jim Furey organized matches as a circus, moving daily from town to town. The Celtics became the strongest team, and their successes lasted from 1922 until 1928, when the team disbanded due to ownership problems. The Original Celtics are sometimes incorrectly thought of as forebears of the current Boston Celtics of the NBA; in reality, they share only a name, as today's Celtics were not founded until 1946, nearly two decades after the demise of the Original Celtics. In 1922, the first all–African American professional team was founded: the Rens (also known as New York Renaissance or Harlem Renaissance).[22] The Rens were the Original Celtics’ usual opponent, and for their matches a ticket cost $1.[23] They took part in some official championships and won the first World Professional Basketball Tournament in 1939. The team disbanded in 1949.

In the 1920s and 1930s, Eastern Basket Ball League (founded in 1909),[24] Metropolitan Basketball League (founded in 1921)[25] and American Basketball League (founded in 1925)[26] were the most important leagues.

Basketball in American colleges
Further information: College basketball
The greatest level of early basketball activity outside of YMCAs was seen in American colleges. The first known U.S. college to field a basketball team against an outside opponent was Vanderbilt University, which played against the local YMCA in Nashville, Tennessee, on February 7, 1893.[27] The second recorded instance of an organized college basketball game was Geneva College's game against the New Brighton YMCA on April 8, 1893, in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, which Geneva won 3–0.[27]

The first recorded game between two college teams occurred on February 9, 1895, when Hamline University faced Minnesota A&M (which later became a part of the University of Minnesota).[27][28] Minnesota A&M won the game, which was played under rules allowing nine players per side, 9–3.[28] The first intercollegiate match using the modern rule of five players per side is often credited as a game between the University of Chicago and the University of Iowa, in Iowa City, Iowa, on January 18, 1896.[27][29] The Chicago team, which was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg, who had learned the game from James Naismith at Springfield YMCA, won the game 15–12.[28][29] (Some sources state the first "true" five-on-five intercollegiate match was a game in 1897 between Yale and Penn, because the Iowa team, that played Chicago in 1896, was composed of University of Iowa students, but did not officially represent the University of Iowa – rather being organized through a YMCA.)[28] By 1900 the game of basketball had spread to colleges across the country .

By 1897 the U.S. Amateur Athletic Union (AAU) had taken over oversight of basketball activity from YMCA.[28] In April 1905, representatives of fifteen colleges separately took over control of the college game, creating the collegiate "Basket Ball Rule Committee".[28] The committee was in turn absorbed into the predecessor of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) in 1909.[28] The extremely popular NCAA men's basketball tournament was started in 1939.

First international games
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by making an edit request. (March 2019)
After its arrival in Europe, basketball developed very quickly. In 1909 the first international match was held in Saint Petersburg: Mayak Saint Petersburg beat a YMCA American team.[30] The first great European event was held in 1919 in Joinville-le-Pont, near Paris, during the Inter-Allied Games. United States, led by future Hall of Fame player Max Friedman, won against Italy and France, and then Italy beat France. Basketball soon became popular among French and Italians. The Italian team had a white shirt with the House of Savoy shield and the players were: Arrigo and Marco Muggiani, Baccarini, Giuseppe Sessa, Palestra, Pecollo and Bagnoli.[31]

Formation of FIBA
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by making an edit request. (March 2019)
World basketball was growing, but it was on June 18, 1932, that a real international organization was formed, to coordinate tournaments and teams: that day, the following representatives of the 8 national federations: Attilio Ponisio (Argentina), Simeon Mavroskoufis (Greece), Count Giorgio Asinari di San Marzano (Italy), Joseph Shadeiko (Latvia), Henry Brandt (Portugal), D.D. Teica (Romania), Léon Bouffard (Switzerland), and Ladilslav Kapucian (Czechoslovakia)[32] founded the International Basketball Federation (Fédération internationale de basketball amateur, FIBA) in Geneva.[33] Its work was fundamental for the first inclusion of basketball in the Berlin Olympic Games in 1936.[34] The first Olympic title was won by the U.S. national team: Sam Balter, Ralph Bishop, Joe Fortenberry, Tex Gibbons, Francis Johnson, Carl Knowles, Frank Lubin, Art Mollner, Donald Piper, Jack Ragland, Willard Schmidt, Carl Shy, Duane Swanson, Bill Wheatley and the trainer James Needles. Canada was runner-up; the games were played on an outdoor clay court. The first World Championship was held in Argentina in 1950.[35]

NBA
The Basketball Association of America (BAA) was founded on June 6, 1946, in New York City.[36] The league adopted the name National Basketball Association (NBA) in 1949 after merging with the rival National Basketball League (NBL). As of the early 21st century, the NBA is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.[37]

The commissioner of the NBA is Adam Silver and his job is to oversee the tasks in the organization.

Many rule changes have occurred since the inception of professional basketball that has altered the game to what we now recognize today. These rule changes did not occur all at once but instead evolved to suit the changing style of play. Starting with the widening of the free-throw lane in 1951 and a further extension in 1964, this change was made to reduce the dominant impact of centers who played with their back facing the basket - otherwise known as Post Position. Then in 1954, the 24-second shot clock was introduced. This was done to increase the speed of the game, by forcing the team with the basketball to shoot the ball before the 24-second timer is up. Finally, the NBA introduced the three-point line, in the 1979–1980 season. This was done to spread out the players, which were predominantly playing underneath the basket at this time as well as add a further degree of difficulty to the game.[38]

In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the influx of black athletes increased excitement and revitalized the NBA. By this time, the league was mainly composed of African American players, and most of the top stars were black. However, in the late 1970s, the popularity of the NBA was once again threatened by the decline in attendance and television ratings. In 1979, the NBA's TV audience declined by 18%.

In the 1980s, former university superstar Earvin "Magic" Johnson of Los Angeles and Larry Bird of Boston once changed the way the game was played. Despite both being 6 ft 9 in (2.06 m) Johnson and Bird could play many roles previously reserved for shorter players. They have been described as two of the 50 best players in NBA history.[citation needed] Just when the NBA needed a new force, Johnson and Bird gave the NBA a new big game to restore its low popularity. During and after that, some superstars entered the league, including Charles Barkley, Hakeem Olajuwon, David Robinson, and Michael Jordan.[39]

Modern-day NBA
The NBA has helped popularize basketball in other parts of the world. A large part of this is due to the transcendent stars that have played the game through the years. It was because of the play of Michael Jordan that basketball started to reach international audiences, especially on the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team, known as the Dream Team.[40]

After his final championship and second retirement in 1998, there was a void as in who would be the face of basketball. Soon after with the help of Shaquille O'Neal, Kobe Bryant would go on to win three straight championships from 2000 to 2002 with the Los Angeles Lakers, helping make basketball more popular in many places around the world, most noticeably China. Further championships in 2009 and 2010 helped raise his popularity.[41] In 2015, he announced the following season would be his last. He would have played in 20 seasons by then.[42]

Another player who revolutionized the game of basketball was LeBron James. He was taken as the first overall pick in the 2003 NBA draft by the Cleveland Cavaliers, and has worked his way to become the face of the NBA and basketball around the world. He left the Cavaliers in 2010 to join the Miami Heat along with fellow stars Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh in what become known as "The Decision",[43] winning back-to-back championships in 2012 and 2013 before returning to the Cavaliers in 2014 where he won a third championship in 2016. He joined the Los Angeles Lakers on July 1, 2018.[44]

There have been many international players who helped globalize the game. The most noticeable would be Yao Ming. He was the first ever Chinese player to be selected with the number one overall pick in 2002 by the Houston Rockets. His play and presence in the NBA brought attention to basketball in Asian countries.

The style of basketball has evolved over time as well. Basketball, especially in the 1990s and 2000s, used to give importance to big men. Now, because of teams like the San Antonio Spurs and the Golden State Warriors, ball movement and team play is more common. The pace of play has also increased.[45] In recent years, players such as Stephen Curry have increased the prevalence of the three-point shot in the professional game.

American Basketball Association
[icon]	
This section needs expansion. You can help by making an edit request. (March 2019)
The American Basketball Association (ABA) was founded as an alternative to the NBA in 1967 [46] at a time when the NBA was experiencing a lot of popularity. The ABA offered an alternative ethos and game style as well as some changes in the rules. Julius Erving was the leading player in the league, and helped launch a modern style of play that emphasizes leaping and play above the rim. His playing strength helped legitimize the American Basketball Association. The league emphasized excitement and liveliness, be it in the color of the ball (red, white and blue), the manner of play, wild promotions, or the three-point shot. National recognition and earnings were low, leading the league to look for a way out of its problems. Merger with the more established and very successful NBA was seen as a solution. The ABA was folded into the NBA in the summer of 1976, its four most successful franchises (the New York Nets, Denver Nuggets, Indiana Pacers, and San Antonio Spurs) being incorporated into the older league.[46] The aggressive, loose style of play and the three-point shot [46] were taken up by the NBA.

African Americans in basketball
With racial segregation affecting all areas of public life in the U.S. including sports, all-black basketball teams (Black Fives) were established in 1904.[47] Dozens of all-black teams emerged during the Black Fives Era, in New York City, Washington, Chicago, Pittsburgh, Philadelphia, Cleveland, and other cities.

The Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn and the St. Christopher Club of New York City were established as the first fully organized independent all-black basketball teams in 1906. These teams were amateur.[48]

In 1907 the amateur, all-black Olympian Athletic League was formed in New York City consisting of the Smart Set Athletic Club, St. Christopher Club, Marathon Athletic Club, Alpha Physical Culture Club, and Jersey City Colored YMCA. The first inter-city basketball game between two black teams was played in 1907 when the Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn traveled to Washington, DC to play the Crescent Athletic Club.[48]

In 1908 Smart Set Athletic Club of Brooklyn, a member of the Olympian Athletic League, was named the first Colored Basketball World's Champion.[49]

In 1910 Howard University’s first varsity basketball team began.

In 1922 the Commonwealth Five, the first all-black professional team was founded. The New York Renaissance was founded in 1923.

In 1939 the all-black New York Renaissance beat the all-white Oshkosh All-Stars in the World Pro Basketball Tournament.

From the late 1920s the African American Harlem Globetrotters were a successful touring team, winning the WPBT in 1940.

The all-white National Basketball League began to racially integrate in 1942 with 10 black players joining two teams, the Toledo Jim White Chevrolets, and the Chicago Studebakers. The NBA integrated in 1950–51 seasons, just two years after its founding, with three black players each achieving a separate milestone in that process. In the draft held immediately prior to that season, Chuck Cooper became the first black player drafted by an NBA team. Shortly after the draft, Nat Clifton became the first black player to sign an NBA contract. Finally, Earl Lloyd became the first black player to appear in an NBA game as his team started its season before either Cooper's or Clifton's.[50]

After the integration of the NBA, the Harlem Globetrotters started to focus on international touring and exhibition performances, including comic routines. These tours helped to popularize basketball internationally, and gave the Globetrotters the reputation as basketball's goodwill ambassadors.[51]

Olympic basketball
Basketball was invented by James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts, in 1891. Within a few decades, the new game became popular throughout the United States as an indoor sport. The popularity spread overseas and the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) was organized in 1932 in Geneva, Switzerland.

Thanks in part to the effort of Phog Allen[52][53]—a Kansas Jayhawks collegiate coach—the first Olympic basketball tournament was organized in the 1936 Berlin Olympics on outdoor tennis courts. Dr. Naismith presented the medals to the top three teams. According to the Olympic rules of that time, all of the competitors were amateurs. The tournament was held indoors for the first time in 1948. The American team proved its dominance, winning the first seven Olympic tournaments through 1968, without losing a single game. While the Americans were barred from sending a team that contained players from the professional National Basketball Association, they instead sent in college players; teams from some other countries sent in their best players, as some of their players were classified as "amateur" by FIBA, by earning allowances instead of wages.

The U.S. winning streak ended in 1972 in one of the most controversial matches in history, when the Soviet Union beat them in the gold-medal game by one point.

The U.S. team reclaimed the gold medal in 1976, with Yugoslavia, which had beaten the Soviet Union in the semifinal, finishing runner-up for the second time. In 1980, with the Americans' absence due to the boycott, Yugoslavia became the third team to win the title, after beating the Soviets anew in the semifinals and Italy in the final. The Americans regained the title in 1984, by beating Spain in the final, with the Soviets boycotting this time. The Soviets won the gold medal for the second time in 1988, after beating the U.S. team for the second time in the semifinal, and the Yugoslavs in the gold medal game.

The advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the Eastern Bloc countries eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage. The Soviet Union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally listed in the military, but all of whom were in fact paid by the state to train full-time.[54][55][56][57] In April 1989, through the leadership of Secretary General Borislav Stanković, FIBA approved the rule that allowed NBA players to compete in international tournaments, including the Olympics.[58] In the 1992 Summer Olympics, the U.S. "Dream Team" won the gold medal with an average winning margin of 44 points per game, and without calling a timeout. By this time, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia no longer existed, but their successor states continued to be among the leading forces. Two newly independent countries of the former Yugoslavia and Soviet Union, Croatia and Lithuania, won the silver and bronze medals respectively.

The American team repeated its victory in 1996 and 2000, but its performance was not as dominant as in 1992. Since active NBA players have been allowed to compete in the Summer Olympics, the 1996 Games in Atlanta is the only instance where the Olympic host city also had a home NBA team — the Hawks. Yugoslavia was the runner-up in Atlanta, and France in Sydney, with Lithuania winning bronze again on both occasions.

The renewed dominance of the U.S. was interrupted in 2004, when the Americans barely made it to the semifinal, after losing to Puerto Rico and Lithuania in the preliminaries; Argentina defeated them in the semifinals, on their way to a gold medal finish, where they beat Italy in the final, and became the fourth team to win the Olympic title.

The Americans regrouped in 2008, beating the reigning FIBA world champions, Spain, in an intense gold medal game, with the Argentines beating the Lithuanians in the bronze medal game. The Americans and the Spaniards met again in the 2012 gold medal game, with the U.S. again winning, although with the closest winning margin for the American team. The U.S. won again in 2016, defeating the Serbians in the gold medal game, a rematch of the 2014 FIBA Basketball World Cup Final, after eliminating the Spaniards, who settled for bronze.

The first women's tournament was staged in the 1976 Summer Olympics. The Soviet Union won five straight games, becoming the inaugural champion. The next two tournaments followed the six-team round-robin format, with the Soviets defending their title in 1980 amid the U.S.-led boycott, and the U.S. winning in 1984, against the South Koreans, amid the Soviet-led boycott. In 1988, the tournament expanded into eight teams, with the Americans beating Yugoslavia in the gold medal game. In 1992, the Unified Team, consisting of the former Soviet republics, defeated China in the gold medal game. In 1996, the tournament settled into its current 12-team format; the U.S. has swept all of the tournaments since then, winning 48 consecutive games.

The rules of basketball can vary slightly depending on the level of play (for example professional rules differ from college rules) or where the game is played (international rules are different from USA professional rules). These rule differences, however, are usually just variations on the basic game of basketball and the majority of the rules discussed below can be applied to most any game of basketball played.

The winner of a basketball game is the team with the most points. You get points by throwing the basketball through the opponent's hoop or basket. In regular play a basket made from within the three point line is worth 2 points and a basket shot from outside the three point line is worth three points. When shooting a free throw, each free throw is worth 1 point.

Rules for the offense
The basketball team on offense is the team with the basketball. When a player has the basketball there are certain rules they must follow:
1) The player must bounce, or dribble, the ball with one hand while moving both feet. If, at any time, both hands touch the ball or the player stops dribbling, the player must only move one foot. The foot that is stationary is called the pivot foot.
2) The basketball player can only take one turn at dribbling. In other words, once a player has stopped dribbling they cannot start another dribble. A player who starts dribbling again is called for a double-dribbling violation and looses the basketball to the other team. A player can only start another dribble after another player from either team touches or gains control of the basketball. This is usually after a shot or pass.
3) The ball must stay in bounds. If the offensive team looses the ball out of bounds the other team gets control of the basketball.
4) The players hand must be on top of the ball while dribbling. If they touch the bottom of the basketball while dribbling and continue to dribble this is called carrying the ball and the player will lose the ball to the other team.
5) Once the offensive team crosses half court, they may not go back into the backcourt. This is called a backcourt violation. If the defensive team knocks the ball into the backcourt, then the offensive team can recover the ball legally.

Defensive Rules
The team on defense is the team without the basketball.
1) The main rule for the defensive player is not to foul. A foul is described as gaining an unfair advantage through physical contact. There is some interpretation that has to be made by the referee, but, in general, the defensive player may not touch the offensive player in a way that causes the offensive player to lose the ball or miss a shot.
Rules for everyone
1) Although the foul rule is described above as a defensive rule, it applies exactly the same to all players on the court including offensive players.
2) Basketball players cannot kick the ball or hit it with their fist.
3) No player can touch the basketball while it is traveling downward towards the basket or if it is on the rim. This is called goaltending. (touching the ball on the rim is legal in some games).
Every player on the court is subject to the same rules regardless of the position they play. The positions in basketball are just for team basketball strategy and there are no positions in the rules.
Basketball Court

INDIANAPOLIS — A poor start to the game. A lousy start to the second half. A feeble finish to the third quarter. Add it all up and the Oklahoma City Thunder dominated those game parts – a total of about six-and-a-half minutes — by a margin of 27-6.
Fortunately for the Indiana Pacers, there were another 41 minutes in Game 3 of the 2025 Finals on Wednesday night at Gainbridge Fieldhouse. Within those were six in particular in the fourth quarter when Pacers’ big men Myles Turner and Obi Toppin made all the difference, scoring a little and denying even more as defenders to help boost Indiana to its 116-107 victory and a 2-1 lead in the best-of-seven championship series.
The moment
Indiana’s 7-1 spurt early in the final quarter was necessary, but all it earned them was a slim 98-96 edge with eight minutes left. Shai Gilgeous-Alexander and Jalen Williams were rolling for OKC, the latter’s left-handed layup pulling the Thunder even at 98-98. Then Turner checked in with 7:04 to play. Toppin had been in since the start of the fourth.
The Pacers’ two big men — both adept at shooting from the arc, both rangy enough to protect the rim — were on the court together against this opponent that gets more attention when it plays its two bigs, Chet Holmgren and Isaiah Hartenstein, in tandem.
The impact
Turner, fighting a cold all day, started simply enough, getting the ball to Tyrese Haliburton for a 3-pointer that sent the Thunder into a timeout. The longest-tenured Indiana player got called for a moving screen, costing his team the ball for Williams’ floater that cut the gap to 101-100. Turner made up for it with a layup over Holmgren with 5:38 left.
That’s when the biggest Pacers asserted their size. Turner blocked a layup attempt by Holmgren. Toppin cleared a missed 3-pointer by Lu Dort. Toppin slammed back an errant jumper by Haliburton. Then it was Toppin’s turn to block Williams at the rim.
When both teams looked up, the Pacers had completed a 9-2 stretch that put them in front, 107-100. Turner and Toppin stayed in, and Turner put the finishing touches on their contributions when he blocked Holmgren twice in rapid succession, first on a long 3-pointer and then on a driving layup.
The fans at Gainbridge Fieldhouse were delirious by that point. The Pacers were up 110-104 with less than two minutes left. The Thunder had lost all momentum, all flow, and were settling for splitting pairs of free throws. In a league in which outcomes seem dictated by the teams that score by threes, scoring by ones wasn’t going to cut it.
What they’re saying
“Well, Myles is under the weather. He may not even be with us tomorrow. He just hasn’t been feeling well the last couple days.”
—Pacers coach Rick Carlisle, talking about Friday’s practice, not Turner succumbing to his cold.
“He did a great job of just taking a couple of deep breaths in the third quarter and just doing a reset and coming back in there ready. That’s what a lot of this is. You have to be super resilient. Things happen in milliseconds. I mean, these guys go by you, they are dunking the ball, they are doing this, they are doing that. It’s a lot going on.”
— Carlisle on Turner’s revival from a slow start
 “They really outplayed us in the fourth. … I thought they were in character in terms of their physicality, their pressure on defense. Then they were in character in terms of their pace on offense. They just stacked way more quality possessions in the fourth quarter than we did.”
— Thunder coach Mark Daigneault.
“[Obi is] gifted. We know what he can do and he’s one of the fastest out there in the league as a big to run the floor. He’s perfect for what we want to do, and obviously, yeah, [his dunking ability] is crazy. I just love when he’s aggressive. Playing defense, running, and again, using his athleticism to just get in the paint, rebound, anything that he can do out there as a big that can move.”
— Pacers forward Pascal Siakam
What’s next
If the Pacers have any say about it and, most likely if they’re going to have any hope running down the Larry O’Brien Trophy, they will need at least two more performances like this one. It always is the group for them, whether it’s Turner and Toppin messing with OKC’s shots and rhythm, Bennedict Mathurin dropping an unexpected 27 off the bench, or backup guard T.J. McConnell bending the game to his will whenever he subs in.
“Look, this is the kind of team that we are,” coach Rick Carlisle said. “We need everybody to be ready. It’s not always going to be exactly the same guys that are stepping up with scoring and stuff like that. But this is how we got to do it.
“We need all of our guys to bring whatever is their thing to our thing.”
They will try to bring it again with just 48 hours between games. Game 4 comes Friday (8:30 p.m. ET, ABC) in the quickest game-to-game turnaround in the series.

Golden State Warriors guard Brandin Podziemski underwent successful surgery yesterday to repair a core muscle injury. He is expected to make a full recovery and be ready for the start of training camp. Podziemski previously underwent successful left wrist debridement surgery on May 27.
Podziemski, 22, scored a career-high 11.7 points to go with 5.1 rebounds, 3.4 assists and 1.1 steals in 26.8 minutes over 64 games (33 starts) for the Warriors in 2024-25. The second-year guard tallied averages of 11.3 points, 5.0 rebounds, 3.1 assists and 1.3 steals in 32.1 minutes over 12 postseason games (11 starts).

INDIANAPOLIS — There’s a different energy in the 2025 NBA Finals, at least sensed by those in this historic and proud basketball state. The Indiana Pacers are leading the championship series and hopeful to spin their own Hoosiers tale.
How realistic is that against the top-seeded Oklahoma City Thunder? Any ambitious goal must start with a significant step, which was taken Wednesday night at Gainbridge Fieldhouse, and perhaps that footprint left an impression on OKC.
It was Pacers 116, Thunder 107, and this game presented a twist. In the first two games combined, the Pacers led by less than two minutes total. This time? Once the lead was seized with six minutes left, it was never surrendered, and here we are.
There was too much Tyrese Haliburton, too much Bennedict Mathurin off the bench, too much rim protection by Myles Turner late in this game for OKC to handle. The Pacers played a more complete game for once and beat the Thunder at their own game — defense, depth and at times dominance.
In the process, the Pacers finally broke their Game 3 jinx, having dropped all three such games in the postseason before Wednesday.
Said Pacers coach Rick Carlisle: “Hard things are hard. Our guys, they have made the investment, and it’s an ongoing thing. It’s like a great marriage, it’s a lot of work.”
The work is paying off so far for Indiana.
Speaking of work: Suddenly, down a game in this series, nothing seems safe anymore for the Thunder, not even a simple inbounds pass. (Hello, T.J. McConnell!)
Here are five takeaways from a momentum-shifting victory by the Pacers:
1.Shai finally silenced a bit
They didn’t shut the MVP down. Honestly, given the season Shai Gilgeous-Alexander has had — and is still having — that doesn’t seem reasonable. Yet this was a clear victory for Andrew Nembhard, Ben Sheppard and the Pacers to flash a different strategy and prevent him from becoming a one-man demolition.
“You’re consistently trying to mix things up because if you give any good player the same look over and over, it can be really tough,” Haliburton said.
He was far from a factor Wednesday, which represented the first tame output by Gilgeous-Alexander in this series. No 30-piece this time, no soul-crushing run of buckets to snatch momentum, no steady trips to the free-throw line, none of that. Just six turnovers and a mild 24 points, which Indiana will take anytime.
The sight of Gilgeous-Alexander working up a sweat to free himself from the Pacers’ clutches was different. Indiana brought help high in the pick-and-roll, which seemed to freeze him at times and limit his movement. He started slow (six first-quarter points) and managed only one bucket in the fourth.
Gilgeous-Alexander had moments. He just didn’t have a game.
“With him, he’s the MVP,” Carlisle said. “You’ve just got to try to make it difficult. And you know, we’ve just got to keep platooning people onto him and try to keep our guys fresh somehow.”

Have the Pacers figured something out? They did so against the Knicks’ Jalen Brunson in the Eastern Conference Finals. Brunson plays a similar style and initially put the Pacers on red alert. But as that series progressed, he labored so much more.

Such is the goal of Carlisle and also Nembhard, who is the first line of defense. They want, and probably need, to solve the Gilgeous-Alexander riddle to capture this series. Wednesday was either the start … or merely a temporary speed bump.

“I’ll clean everything up and try to be better for this basketball team come next game,” Gilgeous-Alexander said.

2. The math adds up for Mathurin
In a best-of-seven championship series, there’s always an unexpected source of production, usually from the bench. One day it’s Alex Caruso, the next it’s Aaron Wiggins or Obi Toppin.

Game 3 was claimed by the Pacers’ Mathurin, a walking bucket on this night who caused problems for a usually dependable OKC defense. His mandate was clear — get ball, shoot ball. And he delivered on that duty.

Let’s see: 27 points in 22 minutes? Shooting 9-for-12 and also 7-for-8 from the free-throw line? Dare we suggest that Mathurin was the best Canadian on a floor shared with Gilgeous-Alexander? And he didn’t even play in the first quarter?

Well, once Carlisle put him in, he stayed with him. Mathurin was that effective and meant that much for an Indiana team that fed off his energy.

“Just whenever my number is called, go into the game and do the right things and try to help my team win,” Mathurin said. “That’s the whole mindset.”

He missed last season’s playoffs with a labrum injury, so in a sense, he was restless. He waited a year for his turn, and it arrived on Wednesday.

3. McConnell steals the show
The urgency and the energy of the Pacers was embodied in a series of blurs by T.J. McConnell, who placed his signature hustle on this game.

“T.J. brought a competitive will to this game,” Carlisle said. “He’s a guy who inspires our team a lot.”

He stole three inbounds passes off of made Indiana baskets. Those had a demoralizing effect on the Thunder and translated into additional points for the Pacers.

In one sequence, he drove to the rim, passed to Toppin for a layup, then stole the inbounds. Another such steal led to a Pascal Siakam shot. It missed, but McConnell grabbed the rebound and dished an assist.

McConnell played 15 minutes, had five steals — three in a rousing second quarter — 10 points and five assists. The crowd was energized and so were his teammates.
“He did a great job of consistently getting there and making hustle play after hustle play, and sticking with it, and I thought we did a great job of just feeding off of what he was doing,” Haliburton said.
4. Tyrese is forceful from the jump
In the two first halves of the previous Finals games, Haliburton was curiously absent. He totaled nine points in those 24 minutes, and for much of that time, the Pacers trailed big, including by as much as 20 in Game 2.
He admitted he needed a better start, and being more aggressive was the key. That didn’t necessarily mean Haliburton had to force shots — that’s not his style anyway — but to create issues for OKC’s defense.
Mission accomplished.
One reason the Pacers led by four at halftime while shooting 55% was Haliburton, who had 12 points with seven assists in the half. He brought bounce, attacked the rim at times, controlled the pace, drew the double-team, which opened the floor for his teammates and helped them to open shots.
“I thought his approach tonight was exactly what it need to be, a combination of spatial awareness and aggression, and you know, a real good feel for aggression to score along with getting his teammates involved at the right times,” Carlisle said.
All told for Haliburton: 22 points (4-for-8 from deep), 11 assists and nine rebounds, a near triple-double all made possible by a first half where he was determined to be more impactful.
“I’m just trying to play the right way,” he said. “This means the world to me and I’m excited to be here. But I do think it’s important that you don’t overreact at any point.”
5. OKC has been here before
It’s very simple: the Thunder must win three out of four games to win the NBA championship. And the next game is in Indianapolis. And the Pacers lost only four games total in the previous three rounds before the Finals.
This is enough to cause understandable concern for a 68-game winner in the regular season. But panic? OKC didn’t in the Western Conference semifinals against the Nuggets, so why start now?
About that Denver series: OKC dropped the first game and trailed 2-1, much like this series so far. Each time, the Thunder’s response was emphatic. They won by 43 points in Game 2, then evened the series in Game 4 with a gutsy five-point win where they refused to crumble in the fourth quarter.
So here they are again. OKC seemed poised to snatch control of this Game 3 in the last 52 seconds of the third quarter, when they flipped a one-point deficit to a five-point lead. Jalen Williams was the architect of that, assisting on a Chet Holmgren dunk before swishing a 26-footer at the buzzer.
This time, though, the Pacers had all the fourth-quarter answers. Holmgren was shut down by Turner, Gilgeous-Alexander had one bucket in the fourth and OKC was outscored 32-18. All told, the Thunder had 19 turnovers, unusual for them. That was a wrap.
“I thought they were in character in terms of their physicality, their pressure on defense,” Thunder coach Mark Daigneault said. “Then they were in character in terms of their pace on offense.”
The slate is clean for Friday (8:30 p.m. ET, ABC). In the Finals, each game takes on its own identity. What was evident one night could disappear the next.
Those are all comforting words for a team eager to avoid falling into a 3-1 hole, which would create a scenario of doom. Panic? In such a situation, it would certainly creep into the conversation.
“The great thing is we have another game coming up,” Holmgren said. “We can’t be thinking about frustration or anything. No matter how good it’s going, how bad it’s going, the focus can’t be on your emotions. It has to be on what we’re trying to accomplish — the task at hand.”

OKLAHOMA CITY — The most recent of the Thunder’s three MVP winners — four if you include James Harden, drafted by this franchise before winning his award in Houston — is thrilled to be part of that very exclusive group.
“Any conversation about me being with those two guys who have done amazing things,” said Shai Gilgeous-Alexander about being lumped with Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, “is hard to put into words.”
But Gilgeous-Alexander is unapologetic about where he wants to differ from those two, and it’s about what they never achieved in Oklahoma City:
“I want to win a championship,” he said.
Gilgeous-Alexander is the MVP partly because he had a stellar 2024-25 season. He was the league scoring champ, did so at high efficiency, ranked among the steals leaders and collected an enviable amount of blocked shots for a point guard. Those were his qualifications and they proved his impact at both ends of the floor.
But had OKC not won 68 games and comfortably captured the top seed in the West, maybe someone else would’ve taken home the MVP trophy.
Winning is what made a decisive difference between him and Nikola Jokic and Giannis Antetokounmpo, the other two finalists. Gilgeous-Alexander impacted winning more than anyone else this season. And winning a championship — OKC has a chance to do that next month — is what he says fuels him. As it should.
Gilgeous-Alexander lavished his teammates with Rolex watches, and as he spoke from a podium Wednesday at the team’s practice facility, those players wore custom T-shirts commemorating him winning the MVP award.
OKC’s centerpiece rises to the top
“As a group we prioritize the right things,” he said about the Thunder. “We prioritize winning, getting better, each other’s success. Just focus on those things, how can you get better. Every day is a learning process, what can we do to win the next day, the next practice, the next game.
“When you take that mentality you get good at it. Become a better team. That mentality has changed this group.”
And Gilgeous-Alexander is the centerpiece. He couldn’t quite remember the moment when he felt he began playing at an MVP level, although the evidence points to the last two seasons, at least, when he collected MVP votes. He was runner-up last season to Jokic.
He arrived in OKC as part of the summer 2019 blockbuster trade involving Paul George going to the Clippers. At the time of the trade, George was the prize, and if anything, Gilgeous-Alexander — coming off a decent rookie season — was secondary in the package to the five No. 1 picks and two swaps.
OKC wanted to use the future draft capital to rebuild and find the next Paul George. Little did the Thunder realize that Gilgeous-Alexander would turn out to be far more valuable than the star they traded.
They gave him the ball and a chance, but it was up to him to put in the work. He became one of the league’s most creative and dangerous scorers — specializing in the mid-range, mainly — and allowed the Thunder to build around him.
SGA: ‘You want to play to win’
Suddenly, an eventual MVP who was cut from his junior varsity team in the eighth grade realized he was living the dream.
“I had nights where I thought I wasn’t good at basketball,” he said. “I had nights when I thought I was the best player in the world before I was. It’s been ups and downs. My mentality is to stay level through it all, and that really helped me, once I figured it out. When I was at my lowest levels of confidence, my mindset helped me attack those situations.
“I always thought that I could be a really good player because I saw what putting your head down and working and controlling what you control can do for you. I made tremendous strides but I never thought this was going to happen.”
With the MVP secured, along with a scoring title and other fringe benefits that come with that, what’s next for Gilgeous-Alexander? Other than a championship?
“Everything is left,” he said. “When I picked up a basketball when I was 9 years old, I never sat there and said ‘I want to be an All-Star.’ I sat there and said, ‘I want to win this tournament.’ Winning is everything and if you don’t win, nothing matters.
“That’s how I see competition in general. Whether you’re with your friends, in a men’s league when you’re 55, whether it’s novice basketball, you want to play to win. That’s where I m at.”
Yes, winning. Capturing the MVP represents a first step in that direction, where he can collect wins. And if he does that, if that’s the path ahead, then Gilgeous-Alexander will indeed distance himself from two other Thunder legends.
“I know Kevin, I know Russ,” he said. “They just dreamed to work hard, just as I had. And this is what can happen.”

Michael Jordan
By acclamation, Michael Jordan is the greatest basketball player of all time. Although, a summary of his basketball career and influence on the game inevitably fails to do it justice, as a phenomenal athlete with a unique combination of fundamental soundness, grace, speed, power, artistry, improvisational ability and an unquenchable competitive desire, Jordan single-handedly redefined the NBA superstar.
Even contemporaneous superstars recognized the unparalleled position of Jordan. Magic Johnson said, “There’s Michael Jordan and then there is the rest of us.” Larry Bird, following a playoff game where Jordan dropped 63 points on the Boston Celtics in just his second season, appraisal of the young player was: “God disguised as Michael Jordan.”
A brief listing of his top accomplishments would include the following: Rookie of the Year; Five-time NBA MVP; Six-time NBA champion; Six-time NBA Finals MVP; Ten-time All-NBA First Team; Nine time NBA All-Defensive First Team; Defensive Player of the Year; 14-time NBA All-Star; Three-time NBA All-Star MVP; 50th Anniversary All-Time Team; Ten scoring titles — an NBA record and seven consecutive matching Wilt Chamberlain; Retired with the NBA’s highest scoring average of 30.1ppg; Hall of Fame inductee.
However, his impact is far greater than awards and championships. He burst into the league as a rookie sensation scoring in droves with an unmatchable first step and acrobatic drives and dunks and concluded his career as a cultural icon. Along the way, he became a true champion who spearheaded the globalization of the NBA with his dynamic on-court abilities and personal sense of style that was marketed to the masses.
He was an accessible star who managed to maintain an air of mystique. He was visible as “Air Jordan,” as part of a sneaker advertising campaign and endorsing other products as well as the star of the movie, “Space Jam”. However, he would vanish into retirement twice only to return until hanging up the sneakers for the last time after the 2002-03 season.
Although Brooklyn born, Jordan was bred in the more tranquil North Carolina. The son of Delores and James Jordan, he shared a special bond with his father, which included baseball being both of their first love. However, following his older brother, Larry, whom he idolized and was a spectacular athlete in his own right, Jordan began to play basketball.
He attended Laney High School in Wilmington, North Carolina, but as a 5-foot-11 skinny sophomore, he was cut from the varsity basketball team. The summer before his junior year, he grew to 6-foot-3 and began his path to superstardom.
A Tar Heel at heart, the high school All-American attended the University of North Carolina. As a freshman, he played somewhat in the shadows of upperclassmen James Worthy and Sam Perkins. However, he shone in the spotlight of the NCAA championship game against Georgetown and another great freshman, Patrick Ewing, whom Jordan would foil future NBA championships for as well. Jordan scored 16 points, grabbed nine rebounds and made the winning basket on a 16-foot jumper with 18 seconds in the game for the 63-62 victory.
As a sophomore, he was named College Player of the Year by The Sporting News. As a junior, he received that award again as well as the Naismith and Wooden Awards. After his junior year he was chosen with the third overall pick in the 1984 NBA Draft by the Chicago Bulls.
The Houston Rockets selected 7-foot center Hakeem Olajuwon form the University of Houston with the No.1 pick, which most expected. The Portland Trail Blazers, however, with the No. 2 pick chose 7-foot-1 center Sam Bowie from Kentucky, which was not as anticipated. Bowie had suffered several injuries while in college but the Blazers bypassed Jordan because just the year before the team selected another exciting shooting guard in Clyde Drexler. Although Drexler went onto to be a star, Bowie was an injury prone player with a journeyman pro career.
Jordan, coming off a gold medal performance at the 1984 Olympics, prospered in the pro game with a fabulous first season, earning the NBA Rookie of the Year Award. He averaged 28.2 ppg, (third behind Bernard King and Bird) 6.5 rpg and 5.9 apg. He also was selected to the All-NBA Second Team. Perhaps more important, the Bulls improved to win 11 more games than in the season prior to his arrival and made it to the playoffs. Jordan averaged 29.3 ppg in the first round series, but the Bulls lost in four games to the Milwaukee Bucks.
In his first season, he did not have outstanding shooting range and was thought to roam too often on defense, resulting from playing trapping defenses in college according to his first NBA coach, Kevin Loughery. Yet, his medium game — eight- to 15-feet from the basket was impressive as evidenced by his .515 field-goal shooting percentage and his steals tended to compensate for his less than stellar straight-up defense.
Improvement in both areas would come and he would ultimately be regarded as threat from anywhere on the floor and one of the best ever one-on-one defenders.
Even in the exhibition season before his rookie campaign, players and coaches were sure that the Rockets and Blazers would regret their picks. King, the eventual leading scorer for that upcoming season, seemed sure as well when he spoke to Hoop magazine after a 1984 preseason game.
“All I can say,” King said, “is that the people in Chicago are in for a real treat.”
He was right. Jordan’s greatness and likeability was apparent in just his first season. Home attendance at the venerable Chicago Stadium and on the road rose dramatically. Fans of opposing teams were seemingly content to see their team lose if in return Jordan put on show.
Jordan’s personal style was equally authentic and unique as his basketball skills. Nike signed him to a major shoe deal because of his anticipated appeal, but he surpassed even the loftiest of expectations. One version of the sneakers he wore in his first preseason was an unseen before blend of his team’s red and black colors that the NBA initially considered in violation of the “uniformity of uniform rule.” Subject to fines if he continued to wear them, he occasionally did and the demand for that version and others in the Air Jordan line was unprecedented.
He also had a clause in his contract that allowed him, unlike most other NBA players, to play basketball anytime in the off-season — known as the “love-of-the-game clause.”
He dangled his tongue out of his mouth — picked up from observing his dad working on mechanical devices — as he levitated toward the basket and it became one of his first trademarks in personal style. He continued to wear the shorts of his beloved North Carolina basketball uniform under his Bulls uniform. This may have led him to wear longer game shorts although he has said that the extra length allowed him to bend at the waist and tug at the hem for a good resting position. Either way, the trend toward the baggy shorts was started and the entire league and sport would follow.
The rookie’s mesmerizing effect was even suggested to have extended to referees as it was said that he was getting veteran preferential treatment allowing him to take that additional step on route to the basket rather than being whistle for a travelling violation. Many assessed that he eluded defenders so easily that he had to be travelling. However, video break down established that his first step was just so quick and that he was not in violation of the rulebook.
Despite all the attention, Jordan retained a sense of humility. He did not ridicule the Blazers for not taking him. Early on in his first season, he told Sports Illustrated, “He [Bowie] fits in better than I would. They have an overabundance of big guards and small forwards.” His self-effacement was more apparent when in that same article he said, “I’d like to play in at least one All-Star game.”
That goal was quickly accomplished as later that season he was voted a starter to the 1985 All-Star East squad. There, he probably faced one of his first professional obstacles. The media ran with the idea that Eastern All-Star teammate Detroit Pistons’ Isiah Thomas, had led a “freeze-out” of the golden rookie limiting his opportunities to score by not passing him the ball.
Jordan scored seven points in 22 minutes and was left to face questions concerning the alleged conspiracy. The affair grew a life of its own over the years, but Thomas refuted such accusations. The whole ordeal would come full circle when Thomas, as the coach of the 2003 East All-Star squad, persuaded Toronto Raptors’ Vince Carter to relinquish his starting role to Jordan in his last midseason classic.
Three games into his second season, he broke a bone in his left foot. He was voted to the All-Star team but could not play as he was sidelined for 64 games. However, he came back late in the year to score a NBA playoff-record 63 points in a first-round game against the Celtics. The Bulls lost that game 132-131 in double-overtime and the series in a sweep, but Jordan averaged 43.7 ppg in the series. If there were any doubters to that point about Jordan’s ability, surely there were no more.
Starting with the 1986-87 season he began a career-long onslaught on the NBA record book. That year saw him average 37.1 points in the first of seven consecutive seasons in which he led the league in scoring and topped 30 points per contest. Jordan scored 40 or more points in nine consecutive games and 23 straight in one game to set an NBA record. At the All-Star Weekend, he won the first of two consecutive Slam Dunk competitions. However, again, the Celtics swept the Bulls in the first round of the playoffs
That offseason, the Bulls began assembling a championship caliber team by drafting power forward Horace Grant and acquiring the versatile small forward Scottie Pippen from tiny Central Arkansas in a draft day trade with the Seattle SuperSonics for former University of Virgina center Olden Polyinice. In 1987-88, Jordan won every major award including MVP, Defensive Player of the Year and All-Star MVP. With the help of his teammates, Jordan led the Bulls to a first-round playoff win over the Cleveland Cavaliers before falling to the Pistons in five games in the conference semifinals.
The Pistons, known as the “Bad Boys” for their aggressive style of play, would defeat Jordan and the Bulls in the Eastern Conference finals in the next two seasons as well. Utilizing a defensive scheme developed by head coach Chuck Daly and his staff known as the “Jordan Rules”, the Pistons dared Jordan to single-handily win games with constant double and triple teaming. The Bulls, however, were nudging to a championship as each successive season the team would get closer.
In the 1988-89 season, perhaps Jordan’s best statistical campaign, he led the league with 32.5 ppg, was 10th in assists with a career high 8.0 apg and had a career high 8.0 rpg. He also ranked third in steals with 2.89 per game. Jordan propelled the Bulls past the Cavs in the first round of the playoffs in the decisive Game 5, scoring the memorable buzzer-beater floating jumper over Craig Ehlo for a 101-100 victory.
Prior to the beginning of the 1989-90 season, Sports Illustrated published an article on Jordan’s emerging golf game and his thoughts about joining the PGA Tour after his NBA career was over. Chicago management, however, was making other moves.
That offseason, the Bulls let go head coach Doug Collins and hired Phil Jackson. Under Jackson’s leadership, the Bulls instituted the triangle offense — a fluid passing and cutting system that created opportunities for all five players on the floor to score. But when the play broke down and the shot clock waned, Jordan had free reign to create his own shot.
The Bulls went 55-27 that season, the franchise’s best record since 1971-72. Jordan set his career game-high in points with 69 against the Cavs in a 117-113 overtime win. He also emerged as a 3-point threat, posting 37.6% — 100 percentage points above his previous best. However, the Pistons defeated the Bulls in a tough seven-game series in the 1990 Eastern Conference finals.
That third consecutive playoff defeat to the Pistons prompted many to think out loud that a scoring champion like Jordan could not lead his team to a title.
Were they ever wrong. The next year, Jordan led the Bulls as the team waltzed through the postseason, losing only twice en route to the franchise’s first NBA title. The redemptive blow was the sweep of the Pistons in the conference finals. And after losing the first game at home to the Los Angeles Lakers in the NBA Finals, the Bulls stormed back to win four straight to end the last remnants of the “Showtime” Lakers as Magic Johnson would retire before the beginning of the next season. Jordan averaged 31.4 ppg, 6.4 rpg and 8.4 apg, earning the first of six NBA Finals MVP awards.
Jordan, who by now shaved his head completely bald, triggering another trend and making him recognizable by just the dark rounded silhouette of his head, was now known as a champion. He was also known to be ultra-demanding of his teammates, ruffling more than a few feathers with his critiques. But winning was the soothing elixir. The Bulls would go on to successfully defend their title for two consecutive seasons, defeating both Drexler and the Blazers and the Charles Barkley-led Phoenix Suns in six games.
By the end of that three-year run, Jordan had eclipsed stardom and approached folk hero status. Early into his career, he drew Peter Pan-like admiration for his gravity defying leaps and belief that he would remain youthful forever. However, during the three-peat, players and teams seemed to concede that the title was Jordan.
At the turn of the 21st century, ESPN conducted an expansive survey of media members, athletes and others associated with the sports world to rank the 20th century’s greatest athletes. Jordan topped the list above Babe Ruth and Muhammad Ali — substantiating his link to those earlier cultural icons.
In 2009, Jordan was immortalized in the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame as the headliner of a class that also included NBA legends John Stockton, David Robinson and Jerry Sloan. One year later, Jordan added another accomplishment to his storied career.
Since 2006, Jordan held a minority ownership stake in the then-Charlotte Bobcats. In 2010, he was approved by the NBA’s Board of Governors as the majority owner of the Bobcats, buying the team from then-owner Bob Johnson. Under Jordan, the Bobcats were eventually renamed the Hornets (starting in the 2014-15 season) to reunite the city with the nickname of its first NBA franchise.
Jordan has been deeply involved in the Charlotte community from a philanthropic perspective, donating millions of his dollars to various causes and charities in the community. During the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic, Jordan opened a second Novant Health Michael Jordan Family Medical Clinic to help communities in the North End of Charlotte get the medical help they needed.
After much speculation about his plans, Jordan returned to the spotlight in a baseball uniform. Attempting to fulfill a dream inspired by his father, the younger Jordan set his sights on Major League Baseball. He spent the 1994 baseball season playing for the Birmingham Barons, an affiliate of the Chicago White Sox in the Class AA Southern League.
He was a competent if unspectacular performer. But Jordan’s hope of reaching the big leagues seemed dim, and with Major League Baseball embroiled in a labor dispute as the 1995 season neared, he focused his competitive fire back on the NBA. Late in the 1994-95 NBA season, he came out of retirement with the succinct statement: “I’m Back.”
He was back, albeit with the unorthodox No. 45 as he wanted to leave No. 23 behind, and attempted to carry the Bulls to another title. Jordan averaged 26.9 points in 17 regular-season games, which the Bulls played to a record of 13-4.
The most memorable game of the initial comeback occurred six games in when he scored 55 points against the Knicks in the Garden. That game, dubbed “Double Nickel,” was extraordinary in that a new Jordan emerged. Robbed of his youthful bounce at age 32, he turned primarily to fadeaway jump shots and spinning layups. And in the waning moments of a tie game, he drew attention as he dribbled around the perimeter and passed to a wide-open Bill Wennington under the basket for the winning points in a 113-111 victory.
His coach, Jackson, in the aftermath said, “It’s rare that players can live quite up to New York. I’ve seen a lot of them fall flat on their faces because of the pressure to perform there. But he had the whole evening in the palm of his hand. Sometimes the game just seems to gravitate into his grasp.”
In the playoffs, he poured in 31.5 ppg. But despite Jordan’s presence in the lineup, the Bulls didn’t have quite enough to get past the Orlando Magic in the conference semifinals. Chicago lost to the Shaquille O’Neal-led Magic in six games.
Jordan’s championship quest was fulfilled the following season with almost a whole new band of players than in his first title runs. He began the season with his old No. 23 uniform but only his sidekick Pippen remaining from the first three championship teams. The Bulls added Dennis Rodman, an enigmatic player but a rebounding and defensive phenom.

LeBron James (born December 30, 1984, Akron, Ohio, U.S.) is an American professional basketball player who is widely considered one of the greatest all-around players of all time and who won National Basketball Association (NBA) championships with the Miami Heat (2012 and 2013), the Cleveland Cavaliers (2016), and the Los Angeles Lakers (2020). In 2023 he became the NBA’s all-time leading scorer, breaking the record (38,387) previously held by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar. His dominance continued when in 2024, he recorded his 40,000 point scored.
A locally known basketball prodigy since elementary school, James was named Ohio’s Mr. Basketball (high-school player of the year) three times while leading Akron’s St. Vincent–St. Mary High School to three Ohio state championships in his four years on the team. He became a national media sensation in his junior year after appearing on the cover of Sports Illustrated, where he was billed by the magazine as “The Chosen One.” James was the consensus national high-school player of the year in his senior season, and he was selected by the Cleveland Cavaliers with the first overall selection of the 2003 NBA draft. Additionally, he signed an unprecedented $90 million endorsement contract with the Nike shoe company before he ever played a professional game.
Despite the pressures brought on by these singular circumstances, James led the Cavaliers in scoring, steals, and minutes played over the course of the 2003–04 season, winning the league’s Rookie of the Year award in the process. A 6-foot 9-inch (2.06-meter) “point forward” who was as adept at bringing the ball down the court as at playing near the basket, James presented a unique challenge for opposing teams; his unmatched athleticism and well-muscled body would not have been out of place in the National Football League.
His game progressed over the following years. He was voted one of the starting forwards on the Eastern Conference All-Star team during his second season, and in his third season he led the Cavaliers to their first playoff berth in nine years. These accomplishments were exceeded during the 2006–07 season, when James guided Cleveland to the franchise’s first berth in the NBA finals. After the Cavaliers upset the favored Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference finals, the Cavaliers were swept by the San Antonio Spurs in the NBA finals, but James’s impressive postseason play led many observers to place him among the very best players in the league. He led the NBA in scoring during the 2007–08 season and earned first team All-NBA honors, but the Cavaliers lost to the eventual champion Boston Celtics in a dramatic seven-game series in the Eastern Conference semifinals. James piloted the Cavaliers to a team-record 66 wins during the 2008–09 season, which helped to earn him the league’s Most Valuable Player (MVP) award. The following season James averaged nearly 30 points per game as he was again named MVP.
At the end of the 2009–10 season, James became arguably the most sought-after free agent in NBA history when his contract with the Cavaliers expired, and he began a prolonged courtship process with a number of teams that had in some cases been planning for his free agency for over two years. In an unprecedented hour-long television special, criticized by many for its undue grandiosity, James announced that he was signing with the Heat. He helped Miami reach the NBA finals in his first year with the team, but the Heat lost the championship to the Dallas Mavericks. In the 2011–12 season James averaged 27.1 points per game and won his third MVP award while helping Miami advance to its second consecutive NBA finals appearance. Backed by his stellar play—James was named the finals MVP—the Heat defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder to win the championship.
He had arguably his greatest individual season in 2012–13, as he averaged 26.8 points, 7.3 assists, and a career-high 8.0 rebounds per game while posting a .565 field-goal percentage, a remarkable rate of made shots for someone who so frequently played away from the basket. James also helped Miami win 27 consecutive games that season (the second longest such streak in NBA history), and he was rewarded with his fourth league MVP award. In the following postseason, the Heat defeated the San Antonio Spurs in a seven-game series to win the NBA championship, and James was again named the finals MVP. He continued his stellar play in the following season, even increasing his shooting percentage by .002, and he again led the Heat to an appearance in the NBA finals. However, Miami lost that rematch with the Spurs in a five-game series.
After that finals loss, James opted out of his contract with the Heat, leaving an aging Miami roster, and—after a week of frenzied speculation among fans and media—he decided to return to Cleveland. Although his 25.3 points per game was James’s lowest scoring average since his rookie season, he nevertheless guided a young and inexperienced Cavaliers roster—which included a 22-year-old Kyrie Irving—to the second best record in the Eastern Conference in 2014–15. In the following postseason he led an injury-laden Cleveland team to just two playoff losses en route to a berth in the NBA finals. There James had one of the greatest individual performances in finals history, averaging 35.8 points, 13.3 rebounds, and 8.8 assists per game while leading the undermanned Cavaliers to the franchise’s first two finals victories before ultimately losing a six-game series to the Golden State Warriors.
James had another strong regular season in 2015–16 but, once again, truly shined in the playoffs. He led the Cavaliers to a rematch against the Warriors, who had set a league record with 73 wins during the regular season, in the NBA finals. There the Cavaliers became the first team to come back from a 3–1 finals deficit to capture the first title in franchise history and end a 52-year title drought for Cleveland professional sports teams. James averaged 29.7 points, 11.3 rebounds, 8.9 assists, 2.6 steals, and 2.3 blocks per game in the finals—becoming the first person to lead all five statistical categories for players on both teams in the finals—and was unanimously named finals MVP.
In 2016–17 James had among his best regular seasons by setting career highs with averages of 8.7 assists and 8.6 rebounds per game while still scoring 26.4 points per game. He sustained his excellence in the Eastern Conference playoffs, scoring 32.5 points per game (which included his 5,988th career postseason point, breaking Michael Jordan’s all-time NBA playoff scoring record) while leading the Cavaliers to a third consecutive match-up against the Warriors in the NBA finals. There Cleveland could not overcome the team James referred to as a “juggernaut,” losing to the Warriors in five games despite James becoming the first player in NBA history to average a triple-double over the course of the finals (with 33.6 points, 12 rebounds, and 10 assists per game).
In 2017–18 he played a full 82-game regular season for the first time in his career and led the NBA in minutes played per game (36.9) while averaging 27.5 points, 8.6 rebounds, and a new career-high 9.1 assists per game. James again excelled in the following playoffs, scoring more than 40 points seven times in the team’s 18 Eastern Conference postseason games (which included two seven-game series) to lead the Cavaliers to their fourth straight NBA finals series against the Warriors. He continued his strong individual play in the finals, but it was not enough to overcome Golden State’s overwhelming talent advantage, and the Warriors swept the series.
Los Angeles Lakers
In the following offseason, James, a free agent, joined the Los Angeles Lakers, where he partnered with center Anthony Davis. He continued to play at a high level, averaging 27.4 points, 8.5 rebounds, and 8.3 assists per game, but he missed significant playing time because of an injury (a strained groin) for the first time in his career. The Lakers struggled in his absence and ultimately finished the 2018–19 season with a 37–45 record, ending James’s personal playoff streak at 13 seasons. The following season was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, which caused a four-month suspension. Play resumed in July 2020 with a shortened schedule, and the Lakers ultimately defeated the Miami Heat to claim the franchise’s 17th NBA title. James’s dominating performance—he averaged 29.8 points, 11.8 rebounds, and 8.5 assists per game—earned him his fourth finals MVP award.
Olympics and other activities
In addition to his achievements in the NBA, James was a member of the U.S. men’s Olympic basketball teams that won the bronze medal at the 2004 Games, the gold medal at the 2008 Games, and the gold at the 2012 Games. James did not return to Olympic competition until the 2024 Paris Games, and there he led the U.S. team to a fifth consecutive gold medal and was named the tournament’s MVP.
Off the court, James occasionally acted, notably appearing as himself in Judd Apatow’s comedy Trainwreck (2015). In 2021 he appeared in the live-action/animated Space Jam: A New Legacy. James was also known for his fashion, appearing at events in elevated streetwear or custom-made suits. He was thus a fitting choice for honorary chair at the 2025 Met Gala, the annual benefit for the Costume Institute at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York City.
James also published a memoir, Shooting Stars (2009; cowritten with Buzz Bissinger), that chronicles his years as a high-school standout.

Cleveland Cavaliers, American professional basketball team based in Cleveland that plays in the Eastern Conference of the National Basketball Association and has won one NBA title (2016).
The Cavaliers began play as an NBA expansion team in 1970 under the ownership of the ambitious entrepreneur Nick Mileti, who at one time owned not only the Cavs but also baseball’s Cleveland Indians and the city’s World Hockey Association franchise (the Cavaliers have since gone through several changes of ownership). Coached by Bill Fitch and playing in the antiquated Cleveland Arena, the Cavs finished their first season with the worst record in the league, a frustrating exercise that was epitomized by John Warren unwittingly shooting at and scoring in the opponent’s basket during one game. The team’s poor season did net them the first overall selection in the 1971 NBA draft, which they used to select guard Austin Carr, the Cavaliers’ first star player.
Cleveland slowly improved through the early 1970s, and in the 1975–76 season Fitch guided a team featuring Carr, forward Bobby (“Bingo”) Smith, and center Nate Thurmond—a key mid-season acquisition—to a 49–33 record and the team’s first division championship. The first playoff series in team history (an Eastern Conference semifinal against the Washington Bullets) was highlighted by three last-second game-winning shots by the Cavs, and the series became known as the “Miracle of Richfield” (for the suburban location of the Coliseum, the team’s home arena from 1974 to 1994). After winning the seven-game series, the Cavaliers advanced to the Eastern Conference finals, where they lost to the Boston Celtics in six games.
Cleveland followed its “Miracle” season with two consecutive winning campaigns that each led to playoff berths, but the Cavs were eliminated in the first round both times. The team then entered into a period marked by poor front-office decisions and high head-coach turnover, and the Cavs posted losing records in each season between 1978–79 and 1986–87. In 1985, however, Wayne Embry took over as the team’s general manager and hired Lenny Wilkens as the Cavs’ head coach for the 1986–87 season.

Wilkens shaped the Cavs into a defensive-minded squad that quickly saw a good measure of success. With a roster that featured center Brad Daugherty, guard Mark Price, and forward Larry Nance, the Cavs won 42 games in the 1987–88 season but were eliminated by Michael Jordan and the Chicago Bulls in the first round of the playoffs. The next year’s postseason series against Jordan’s Bulls, however, proved to be significantly more memorable. The Cavs finished the 1988–89 regular season with a then-franchise-best 57–25 record, which was second only to that of the Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference. Cleveland’s first-round series against the Bulls extended to a deciding fifth game, which ended when Jordan—after dramatically hanging in midair as defender Craig Ehlo passed by—made a buzzer-beating basket that became known simply as “The Shot.” The Cavaliers matched their all-time best record during the 1991–92 season, and they defeated the New Jersey Nets and the Boston Celtics in the playoffs en route to a berth in the Eastern Conference finals. There they once again faced off against the Bulls, who eliminated the Cavs in six games.
The Cavs moved to a new arena in downtown Cleveland in 1994. They advanced to the playoffs five times in the six seasons between 1992–93 and 1997–98—but advanced past the first round on just one occasion, a conference semifinal loss to the Bulls in 1993—and then posted losing records for six consecutive seasons, including a conference-worst 17–65 mark in 2002–03. That finish resulted in the Cavaliers again gaining the first selection in the NBA draft, which they used to select LeBron James, a much-touted high school star from nearby Akron, Ohio. James guided the Cavaliers back to the postseason in 2005–06, and one year later the franchise made its first appearance in the NBA finals, where the young Cavs were swept by the San Antonio Spurs. In 2008–09 the Cavaliers won 66 games, posting the best record in the NBA that season. However, after easily sweeping the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds of the postseason, the Cavs were upset by the Orlando Magic in the Eastern Conference finals. The Cavs again had an NBA-best record in 2009–10 but were upset in the second round of the playoffs by the Celtics. During the following offseason, James signed with the Miami Heat, and the Cavaliers returned to the lower echelons of the NBA in 2010–11.
The team’s poor play combined with outstanding luck in the NBA draft lottery to result in the Cavs’ winning the top overall draft pick in an unprecedented three out of four years between 2011 and 2014. Cleveland’s resulting young and promising core of players—headlined by All-Star point guard Kyrie Irving—proved encouraging enough to lure James back to the team when he became a free agent in July 2014. The Cavs then traded for a third perennial All-Star, power forward Kevin Love, and entered the 2014–15 season as the odds-on favorite in the Eastern Conference. Cleveland struggled early in the season before the young team came together to post the second best record in the conference. Despite the team’s loss of Love to a season-ending injury in Cleveland’s fourth playoff game and a banged-up Irving missing multiple playoff contests, James’s stellar postseason play led the franchise to its second appearance in the NBA finals. Irving suffered a broken kneecap during the first game of the finals, but James still led Cleveland to its first two finals victories before the team ultimately lost the NBA title to the Golden State Warriors in six games.

Dwyane Wade (born January 17, 1982, Chicago, Illinois, U.S.) is an American professional basketball player who was one of the best players of his era and who won three National Basketball Association (NBA) championships (2006, 2012, and 2013) as a member of the Miami Heat.
Coming out of high school, Wade was lightly recruited by colleges and accepted a scholarship to Marquette University. He had a breakout season as a junior when he averaged 21.5 points per game and led Marquette to an unexpected berth in the Final Four of the National Collegiate Athletic Association men’s basketball tournament. Wade was named a consensus All-American and decided to forgo his senior season so as to declare for the 2003 NBA draft, in which the Heat selected him as the fifth overall pick.
Wade made an immediate positive impact on the Heat, earning first-team NBA All-Rookie honours after scoring 16.2 points per game in 2003–04. The following season he increased his scoring average to 24.1 points per game and led the Heat in assists to earn his first career All-Star selection while leading Miami (alongside newly acquired centre Shaquille O’Neal) to the best record in the NBA’s Eastern Conference. Although the Heat fell to the Detroit Pistons in the conference finals that season, the team bested that postseason result in 2005–06, beating the Pistons to win the first conference title in team history. In the NBA finals Wade had one of the greatest individual playoff performances in league history. After the Heat was trailing the Dallas Mavericks two games to none in the best-of-seven series, Wade proceeded to average 39.3 points per game over the next four contests (all Miami victories) to lead the way to the NBA championship and earn the finals’ Most Valuable Player award.
Following his breakthrough finals exploits, Wade continued to improve—notably leading the NBA in scoring average in 2008–09 with 30.2 points per game—but Miami failed to match its earlier postseason success over the four seasons after the team’s championship. During the 2010 off-season Wade recruited free-agent superstars LeBron James and Chris Bosh to sign with the Heat. Although James supplanted him as the focal point of Miami’s offense, Wade continued his All-Star-level play, and the Heat advanced to the NBA finals during the star trio’s first season together. The Heat lost that series to the Mavericks, but it returned to the finals in 2011–12 and defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder to capture another NBA title. Although the Heat made a third consecutive trip to the finals in 2012–13, Wade’s playoff production was lacklustre. Aging and injured, he averaged a career-low 15.9 points per game during the postseason. However, his standout performance down the stretch of a seven-game NBA finals series against the San Antonio Spurs helped Miami clinch its third NBA title. Wade and the Heat advanced to a fourth consecutive appearance in the NBA finals in 2013–14, but Miami lost its championship rematch with the Spurs. James left Miami in the following off-season, and the team fell from the NBA’s upper echelon. Meanwhile, Wade resumed his role as the team’s focal point, leading the Heat with 21.5 points per game. The Heat rebounded in 2015–16, earning the third seed in the Eastern Conference playoffs after winning 48 games and advancing to the second round of the postseason. During the following off-season, Wade—who had previously signed a number of below-market deals with the Heat in attempts to help the team add more surrounding talent—grew frustrated with what he perceived to be a lack of appreciation from Miami’s management via its low contract offer, and he surprisingly signed with his hometown Chicago Bulls.
He averaged 18.3 points per game in his first season with the Bulls—the lowest scoring average since his rookie year—and saw the end of his 12-year streak of being selected for the All-Star Game. The Bulls qualified for the final spot in the Eastern Conference playoffs and were eliminated in six postseason games. Wade and the Bulls agreed to a contract buyout in the following off-season, and he then signed a one-year deal to play alongside James as a member of the Cleveland Cavaliers. Wade failed to find a useful role with the Cavaliers, and a struggling Cleveland team traded him back to Miami in February 2018. He played his final season and a half with a middling Heat team before retiring at the end of the 2018–19 season.
In addition to his NBA accomplishments, Wade was a member of the 2004 bronze-medal-winning U.S. men’s Olympic basketball team and the 2008 Olympic gold-medal-winning team. He was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in 2023.

Dwyane Wade
Former pro basketball player Dwyane Wade starred for the Miami Heat for most of his 16 NBA seasons, earning 13 All-Star selections and winning three titles.
Who Is Dwyane Wade?
Born in 1982 in Chicago, Illinois, Dwyane Wade starred at Marquette University before joining the NBA's Miami Heat in 2003. Known as "D-Wade" or "Flash," he became one of pro basketball's elite guards, leading the Heat to championships in 2006, 2012 and 2013. Following late-career stints with the Chicago Bulls and Cleveland Cavaliers, Wade returned to Miami and retired in 2019 as the team's all-time leader in numerous categories.
Early Life
Former professional basketball player Dwyane Tryone Wade Jr., known as "D-Wade" or "Flash," was born on January 17, 1982, in Chicago, Illinois. Shortly after his birth, Wade's parents separated, and his mother, Jolinda, was given custody of the two younger children, Wade and his 5-year-old sister, Tragil. The family struggled financially and was eventually forced to go on welfare.
Wade's life took a turn for the better when, at 8 years old, he was tricked by his sister; Tragil told him they were going to the movies, but they instead went to a different South Side neighborhood. Tragil then returned home, and left Wade to stay with his father, who had re-married. The move changed the course of Wade's life, leading him away from the crime-ridden surroundings of his early years.
A year later, Wade's father moved the family to Robbins, Illinois—a south Chicago suburb. Wade's new environment allowed him to play basketball outside with his stepbrothers, new friends and father, who coached part-time at a local recreational center. It was here that Wade attended Harold L. Richards High School in Oak Lawn, where his older stepbrother Demetrius had already made a name for himself as the star of the basketball team.
Although he initially found more success as a wide receiver on the football team, Wade worked hard to earn regular time on the varsity basketball court during his junior year. After improving his ball-handling skills and outside game, as well as shooting up by nearly four inches—to more than 6 feet tall—Wade emerged as the basketball team's new star. During his junior year, he averaged 20.7 points and 7.6 rebounds per game, making a name for himself throughout Chicago.
His success continued into his senior year—at that time, he was averaging 27 points and 11 rebounds per game. However, due to his poor grades, he was only recruited by three college basketball programs. Wade has stated that his high school coach, Jack Fitzgerald, was one of the most positive influences in his life during this time.
College Basketball Career
Wade chose to attend Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Although he was ineligible to play due to low academic scores, head coach Tom Crean took him on as a partial qualifier. This meant that although he had to sit out the 2000-01 season, Wade was still allowed to attend school and practice with the team. After taking the time to develop his skills even further, he emerged in his sophomore year with an average of 17.8 points, 6.6 rebounds and 3.4 assists per game. The team's record that season was 26-7.
As a junior, Wade led Marquette to the school's first Conference USA championship, as well as a berth in the NCAA tournament's Final Four for the first time since 1977. He averaged 21.5 points per game, as the team's lead scorer. In the 2003 NCAA Midwest Regional Final, Wade recorded the fourth triple-double in NCAA tournament history. His 29 points, 11 rebounds and 11 assists against the top-seeded Kentucky Wildcats were publicized by the national press. Wade was even chosen as the MVP of the Midwest Regional Final. Unfortunately, his success ended in the Final Four, with a 94-61 loss to the Kansas Jayhawks.
NBA Career
Due to his newfound fame and success, Wade decided to forgo his senior year and instead enter the 2003 NBA draft. He was selected by the Miami Heat with the fifth overall pick.
Wade's first year with the Heat was a notable one, as he averaged 16.2 points, 4.5 assists and 4.0 rebounds per game to earn unanimous selection to the 2004 NBA All-Rookie team. After Shaquille O'Neal was traded to the Heat, Wade's numbers increased further, with new averages of 24.1 points and 6.8 assists per game.
First Championship
In 2006, Wade gave an impressive performance in the NBA Finals against the Dallas Mavericks. In the third game of the Finals, he scored 42 points and grabbed 13 rebounds, helping the Heat defeat the Mavericks for a close 98-96 win. His 36 points, 10 rebounds and five assists in the clinching sixth game earned him the honor of the NBA Finals MVP.
After a series of operations to repair shoulder and knee injuries, Wade emerged for another strong season in 2008, arguably his best ever with the Heat. Averaging 30.2 points per game, he earned his first NBA scoring title.
The Big Three
In 2010, Wade became a free agent for the first time, but he re-signed with the Heat and returned to the court with two new All-Star teammates, LeBron James and Chris Bosh. Known as the "Big Three," the superstar trio lived up to expectations and powered through the NBA's Eastern Conference, before losing to the Mavericks in the 2011 NBA Finals.
In 2012, the Heat returned to the Finals, and this time they held off the Oklahoma City Thunder, led by Kevin Durant and Russell Westbrook, to claim the NBA championship. The following year, the Heat defeated the San Antonio Spurs in a thrilling seven-game Finals to give the Big Three their second title together.
Hampered by nagging injuries in 2013-14, Wade played in just 54 regular-season games and saw his scoring average dip below 20 points per game for the first time since his rookie year. The Heat rallied to advance to the NBA Finals for the fourth consecutive season, but with Wade noticeably less than full strength, they were blown out by the Spurs in five games.
James' return to the Cleveland Cavaliers for the start of the 2014-15 season brought an end to the Big Three era, and with Wade again limited by injuries, the team stumbled to a 37-45 record. The star guard bounced back the following season to appear in 74 games, his highest total in five years, and the Heat pushed the Toronto Raptors to the limit in the conference semifinals before falling in seven games.
Chicago, Cleveland and Back to Miami
Another era came to an end when Wade signed with his hometown Chicago Bulls in July 2016, after 13 seasons with the Heat. The 2016-17 campaign was a disappointing one, however, as Wade failed to garner an All-Star selection for the first time since his rookie year and the Bulls were bounced in the first round of the playoffs.
A trade to Cleveland before the start of 2017-18 reunited Wade with James, but the pair were unable to rekindle the old magic, and Wade was sent back to Miami halfway through the season. No longer a starter, he still helped the Heat finish with a solid 44-38 record and earn a postseason berth.
Wade enjoyed one final season in Miami, earning his 13th All-Star selection, before closing out his career with a triple-double in the 2018-19 regular-season finale for the Heat. He finished as the organization's all-time leader in numerous categories, including points, games, assists and steals.
Family and Personal Life
In 2002, Wade married his high school girlfriend, Siohvaughn Funches, with whom he had two sons, Zaire (born in 2001) and Zion (born in 2007). The couple divorced in 2010, with Wade obtaining full custody of Zaire and Zion the following year.
Wade began dating actress Gabrielle Union, but during a break in their relationship he fathered another son, Xavier. Wade and Union reconciled and married on August 30, 2014, in Miami. In November 2018, they had daughter Kaavia together.
Wade's memoir, A Father First: How My Life Became Bigger Than Basketball (2012), documents his life as a single dad navigating pro basketball fame.

With his impressive record, it was no surprise that James was the first player picked in the 2003 NBA Draft straight out of high school. The Cleveland Cavaliers signed the powerful young forward, and he proved to be a valuable addition to the then-struggling franchise. The team had ended the previous season in eighth place in the Eastern Conference.
During the 2003-04 season, James made history when he became the first member of the Cavalier franchise to win the NBA Rookie of the Year Award. At only 20 years old, he also became the youngest player to receive this honor. Additionally, James averaged 20 points per game at this time and became one of only three rookies to accomplish this feat, putting him in the same company as Michael Jordan and Oscar Robertson.
Superstar with the Cleveland Cavaliers
In 2006, James helped the Cleveland Cavaliers defeat the Washington Wizards in the first round of playoff action. From there, his team took on the Detroit Pistons in the Eastern Conference semifinals. James scored an average of 26.6 per game in this postseason matchup, but it wasn’t enough to secure victory. While the Cavaliers weren’t at the top of the rankings, James continued to receive special recognition for his individual abilities.
Also that year, James reached a new contract agreement with the Cavaliers. The team proved to be stronger competitors the following season, defeating Detroit to win the Eastern Conference. In the NBA Finals against the San Antonio Spurs, however, the Cavaliers lost their championship bid in four consecutive games.
During the 2007-08 season, James continued to help the Cavaliers improve their standing in the Eastern Conference. The team made it to the semifinals, where they were defeated by the Boston Celtics in seven games. In terms of individual performance, James had a stellar year, outperforming such rival players as Kobe Bryant and Allen Iverson, by scoring an average of 30 points per game, the highest average in the NBA regular season.
Early in the 2008-09 season, sports journalists and fans began talking about James’ future in the sport. He had the option to become a free agent in 2010, and there was much discussion as to where James would end up. Some journalists identified the New York Knicks as a potential suitor for the rising player.
James made several references to his impending free-agent status, but he was sure to downplay the matter. “I am focused on the team that I am on right now and winning a championship... I don’t think about making a change at this point,” James told reporters.
Joining the Miami Heat
LeBron James and Chris Bosh joined Dwayne Wade on the Miami Heat starting in the 2010-11 season.
Shortly after becoming a free agent, James announced that he would be joining the Miami Heat for the 2010-11 season. His fans in Cleveland were less than pleased, and many considered his departure a betrayal to his hometown. Soon after James’ announcement, Cleveland Cavaliers majority owner Dan Gilbert wrote an open letter declaring James’ decision as “selfish,” “heartless” and a “cowardly betrayal.” Unfazed, James finished second in the league during his first season with the Heat, scoring 26.7 points per game.
The 2011-12 season saw major success for James and the Miami Heat. With his team’s victory over the Oklahoma City Thunder in the NBA Finals, the superstar forward finally earned his first title. In the clinching Game 5, James scored 26 points and had 11 rebounds and 13 assists. “I made a difficult decision to leave Cleveland, but I understood what my future was about,” James told Fox Sports following the game. “I knew we had a bright future [in Miami].”
During the 2012-13 season, James made NBA history yet again: On January 16, 2013, at age 28, he became the youngest player to score 20,000 points, succeeding Kobe Bryant of the Los Angeles Lakers—who accomplished this feat when he was 29—and becoming only the 38th player in NBA history to achieve this distinction. James made a jump shot the final seconds of the game, bringing his scoring total 20,001 and leading the Heat to a 92-75 victory over the Golden State Warriors.
Success followed the Heat to the end of the 2012-13 season: Following a hard-fought, six-game series against the Indiana Pacers to win the Eastern Conference, Miami outlasted the San Antonio Spurs in seven games to win its second consecutive NBA championship.
At the culmination of the 2013-14 season, Miami returned to the NBA Finals to face off against the Spurs again, this time losing to San Antonio after five games.
Return to Cleveland Cavaliers
In July 2014, after opting out of his contract with the Heat and considering other teams, James announced that he was returning to the Cavaliers. Hampered by back and knee problems, James missed 13 of 82 regular-season games in 2014-15. However, he was as dominant as ever when healthy, averaging 25.3 points and 7.4 assists per game. James led the Cavaliers to the NBA Finals, becoming the first player in nearly 50 years to reach the championship round in five consecutive seasons. However, injuries to star teammates Kevin Love and Kyrie Irving damaged his hopes of claiming a third title, and the Cavaliers lost to the Golden State Warriors in six games.
Over the course of 2015-16, the Cavs overcame the distraction of a mid-season coaching change and breezed through the playoffs to earn a rematch with the Warriors, marking the sixth straight NBA Finals appearance for “King James.” In perhaps the crowning achievement of his career, he led his team back from a 3-1 deficit, scoring 41 points in both Games 5 and 6, before recording a triple-double in Game 7 to give the Cavs their first championship in franchise history.

OKLAHOMA CITY (AP) — This has been Oklahoma City’s formula all season: Lose one game, respond in the next.
That’s exactly what the Thunder did in Game 2 of the NBA Finals.
Shai Gilgeous-Alexander scored 34 points, Alex Caruso added 20 off the bench and the Thunder beat the Indiana Pacers 123-107 on Sunday night to tie these Finals at one game apiece.
Jalen Williams scored 19, Aaron Wiggins had 18 and Chet Holmgren finished with 15 for the Thunder. It was the franchise’s first finals game win since the opener of the 2012 series against Miami.
“We did some things good tonight. We did some things bad,” Gilgeous-Alexander said. “We’ve got to be able to get better and be ready for Game 3.”
Tyrese Haliburton scored 17 for Indiana, which erased a 15-point, fourth-quarter deficit in Game 1 but never made a push on Sunday. Myles Turner scored 16 and Pascal Siakam added 15 for the Pacers, the first team since Miami in 2013 to not have a 20-point scorer in the first two games of the finals.
Game 3 is Wednesday at Indianapolis, in what will be the first finals game in that city in 25 years.
“A bad first half, obviously, was a big problem,” Pacers coach Rick Carlisle said. “And we just played poorly. A little better in the second half. But you can’t be a team that’s reactive and expect to be successful or have consistency.”
Gilgeous-Alexander’s first basket of the night was a history-maker: It gave him 3,000 points on the season, including the regular season and playoffs. And later in Game 2, he passed New York’s Jalen Brunson (514) as the leading overall scorer in these playoffs.
But the real milestone for the MVP came a couple hours later, when he and most everybody else on the Thunder got a Finals win for the first time.
A 19-2 run in the second quarter turned what was a six-point game into a 23-point Thunder lead. It might have seemed wobbly a couple of times — an immediate 10-0 rebuttal by the Pacers made it 52-39, and Indiana was within 13 again after Andrew Nembhard’s layup with 7:09 left in the third — but the Thunder lead was never in serious doubt.
“They did a good job being disruptive,” Siakam said. “They got out in transition. … They were super aggressive, which is what they do.”
With the noise level in the building often topping 100 decibels — a chain saw is 110 dB, for comparison purposes — the Thunder did what they’ve done pretty much all season. They came off a loss, this time a 111-110 defeat in Game 1, and blew somebody out as their response.
Including the NBA Cup title game, which doesn’t count in any standings, the Thunder are now 18-2 this season when coming off a loss. Of those 18 wins, 12 have been by double digits.
“That’s a long 48 hours when you lose Game 1 like that, coming into Game 2,” Thunder coach Mark Daigneault said. “The guys did a great job of just focusing on what we needed to do to stack to a win tonight. That’s how we got it.”
National Basketball Association (NBA), professional basketball league formed in the United States in 1949 by the merger of two rival organizations, the National Basketball League (founded 1937) and the Basketball Association of America (founded 1946). In 1976 the NBA absorbed four teams from the American Basketball Association (ABA), which disbanded that year.
League growth and membership
By the early 1980s the NBA was plagued by money-losing franchises, low attendance, declining television ratings, and limited national appeal. The league soon rebounded under the leadership of David Stern, NBA commissioner from 1984, who helped transform it into an international entertainment company. Aggressive marketing highlighted star players such as Magic Johnson, Larry Bird, and, especially, Michael Jordan. Other innovations included league limits on player salaries, lucrative broadcast rights for network and cable television, and expanded All-Star Game festivities.
The top-ranking teams at the end of each season engage in a playoff to determine the NBA champion, which claims the title of world champion. Probably the most dominant team in NBA history was the Boston Celtics, which, led by center Bill Russell, won 11 of 13 titles from 1956–57 to 1968–69; however, the league in those years contained only 8 to 14 teams, and team owners widely avoided signing African American players at the time. Other outstanding clubs were the Minneapolis (later Los Angeles) Lakers in the 1950s, the Los Angeles Lakers in the ’80s, and the Chicago Bulls in the ’90s.
NBA championship
Winners of the National Basketball Association championship are provided in the table.
basketball, game played between two teams of five players each on a rectangular court, usually indoors. Each team tries to score by tossing the ball through the opponent’s goal, an elevated horizontal hoop and net called a basket.
The only major sport strictly of U.S. origin, basketball was invented by James Naismith (1861–1939) on or about December 1, 1891, at the International Young Men’s Christian Association (YMCA) Training School (now Springfield College), Springfield, Massachusetts, where Naismith was an instructor in physical education.
While basketball is competitively a winter sport, it is played on a 12-month basis—on summer playgrounds, in municipal, industrial, and church halls, in school yards and family driveways, and in summer camps—often on an informal basis between two or more contestants. Many grammar schools, youth groups, municipal recreation centers, churches, and other organizations conduct basketball programs for youngsters of less than high school age. Jay Archer, of Scranton, Pennsylvania, introduced “biddy” basketball in 1950 for boys and girls under 12 years of age, the court and equipment being adjusted for size.
While basketball helped swell the membership of YMCAs because of the availability of their gyms, within five years the game was outlawed by various associations because gyms that had been occupied by classes of 50 or 60 members were now monopolized by only 10 to 18 players. The banishment of the game induced many members to terminate their YMCA membership and to hire halls to play the game, thus paving the way to the professionalization of the sport.
Originally, players wore one of three styles of uniforms: knee-length football trousers; jersey tights, as commonly worn by wrestlers; or short padded pants, forerunners of today’s uniforms, plus knee guards. The courts often were of irregular shape with occasional obstructions such as pillars, stairways, or offices that interfered with play. In 1903 it was ruled that all boundary lines must be straight. In 1893 the Narragansett Machinery Co. of Providence, Rhode Island, marketed a hoop of iron with a hammock style of basket. Originally a ladder, then a pole, and finally a chain fastened to the bottom of the net was used to retrieve a ball after a goal had been scored. Nets open at the bottom were adopted in 1912–13. In 1895–96 the points for making a basket (goal, or field goal) were reduced from three to two, and the points for making a free throw (shot uncontested from a line in front of the basket after a foul had been committed) were reduced from three to one.
Baskets were frequently attached to balconies, making it easy for spectators behind a basket to lean over the railings and deflect the ball to favor one side and hinder the other; in 1895 teams were urged to provide a 4-by-6-foot (1.2-by-1.8-meter) screen for the purpose of eliminating interference. Soon after, wooden backboards proved more suitable. Glass backboards were legalized by the professionals in 1908–09 and by colleges in 1909–10. In 1920–21 the backboards were moved 2 feet (0.6 meter), and in 1939–40 4 feet, in from the end lines to reduce frequent stepping out-of-bounds. Fan-shaped backboards were made legal in 1940–41.

The only two players permitted to enter this area prior to the tipoff are the players contesting the jump ball (usually but not always centers). Both players jump when the referee throws the ball in the air, each attempting to tap the ball into the hands of a player of their own team.
Three-point line
The three-point line is the line that separates the two-point area from the three-point area; any shot made beyond this line counts as three points. If the shooting player steps on the line, it is counted as two points. Any foul made in the act of shooting beyond the three-point line would give the player three free throws if the shot does not go in, and one if it does.
The distance to the three-point line from the center of the basket varies depending on the level or league, and has changed several times. These are the current distances, with the league or level using each distance:
The NBA adopted the three-point line at the start of the 1979–80 season. This is of variable distance, ranging from 22 feet (6.7 m) in the corners to 23.75 feet (7.24 m) behind the top of the key. During the 1994–95, 1995–96 and 1996–97 seasons, the NBA attempted to address decreased scoring by shortening the overall distance of the line to a uniform 22 feet (6.7 m) around the basket. It was moved back to its original distance after the 1996–97 season. FIBA and the NCAA both adopted the three-point line in 1986.
In most high school associations in the United States, the distance is 19.75 feet. This was formerly the distance for college basketball as well. On May 26, 2007, the NCAA playing rules committee agreed to move the three-point line back one foot to 20.75 feet for the men. This rule went into effect for the 2008–2009 season. The three-point line for women (NCAA) moved back one foot to 20.75 feet at the start of the 2011–12 season. During the 2019 offseason, the NCAA men's playing rules committee adopted the FIBA arc in a two-phase implementation, with Division I adopting the new arc in 2019–20 and other NCAA divisions doing so in 2020–21. The NCAA women's arc was moved to the FIBA arc starting in 2021–22.
The international distance, used in most countries outside the United States, as well as in FIBA and NCAA competition, is currently 6.6 m (21.65 ft) to 6.75 m (22.15 ft). The WNBA uses FIBA's arc except in the corner area, where the minimum distance is the NBA standard of 22 ft (6.71 m).
Perimeter
The perimeter is defined as the areas outside the free throw lane and inside the three-point line. Shots converted (successfully made) from this area are called "perimeter shots" or "outside shots" as called during older NBA games. If a player's foot is on the three-point line, the shot is considered a perimeter shot.
Low post area
The low post is defined as the areas closest to the basket but outside of the free throw lane.[7] This area is fundamental to strategy in basketball. Skilled low post players can score many points per game without ever taking a jump shot.
The key, free throw lane or shaded lane refers to the usually painted area beneath the basket; for the NBA, it is 16.02 feet (wider for FIBA tournaments). Since October 2010, the FIBA-spec key has been a rectangle 4.9 m wide and 5.8 m long. Previously, it was a trapezoid 3.7 meters (12 ft) wide at the free-throw line and 6 meters (19 feet and 6.25 inches) at the end line; the NBA and U.S. college basketball has always used a rectangle key.
The key is primarily used to prevent players from staying beneath the basket of the opponents' team for long periods (maximum three seconds).
The no charge zone arc is a semi-circular arc drawn around the area directly underneath the basket. With some exceptions, members of the defending team cannot draw charging fouls in this area. The no charge zone arc in almost all North American rule sets above high school level (NCAA men's, NBA, and WNBA) has a radius 4 feet (1.22 m) from below the center of the basket. FIBA uses a marginally larger radius of 1.25 m (4 ft 1.2 in). Starting with the 2023–24 season, NCAA women's basketball reduced the size of the no-charge arc to a radius of 9 inches (22.86 cm)—in other words, the size of the basket. The no charge zone arc rule first appeared at any level of basketball in the NBA in the 1997–98 season.[8] The NCAA restricted area arc was originally established for the 2011–12 men's and women's seasons at a 3-foot (0.91 m) radius from below the center of the basket, and was extended to match the 4-foot radius for the 2015–16 season and beyond. NCAA men's basketball still uses the 4-foot radius.
Baseline
The baseline or endline is the boundary line running the end of the court, and usually measures 50 feet long. Inbounds passes after made baskets are taken from the baseline.
Other lines
On NBA floors, two hash marks are drawn at the end lines near the key to mark the area known as the lower defensive box. A defensive player is allowed to draw a charging foul within the restricted arc if the offensive player receives the ball and/or starts his drive within this area.[9]
Also, two lines are drawn on each of the sidelines, 28 feet from each of the endlines, which designates the extent of the coaching box and bench. This line marks the farthest extent a coach (aside from the sidelines) can stand. Directly behind this area is the team bench.
On the half-court line of NBA floors two lines extend outside the playing court, designating the place where substitutes wait before they can enter the playing court; directly behind this area are the various off-court officials such as the timekeeper and reserve referee.
IBA changes
Three different keys as used by different leagues in the world. The NBA one not rectangular, is wider than the one used by the NCAA and NAIA, and has a circle with the central diameter the edge of the key. The NCAA's or NAIA's key is virtually the same with the NBA's key but is narrower and has no hash marks for the lower half of the circle. FIBA's key is similar to the NBA's.
The FIBA key was changed in 2010 to more closely match the NBA key.
On April 26, 2008, FIBA announced several major rules changes involving the court markings. These changes took effect for major international competitions on October 1, 2010, after that year's World Championships for men and women, and became mandatory for other competitions on October 1, 2012 (although national federations could adopt the new markings before 2012). The changes were as follows.[10]
The shape of the key changed from a trapezoid to a rectangle as it is in the NBA, with NBA dimensions.
The three-point line moved back to 6.75 meters (22 ft 1.7 in) from 6.25 meters (20 ft 6.1 in), compared to 23 ft 9 in (7.24 m) for the NBA at the top of the arc.

The FIBA adopted the NBA's restricted area arc with a marginally wider radius of 1.25 meters (4 ft 1.2 in).
Tyrese Haliburton praised a team effort from the Indiana Pacers after they beat the Oklahoma City Thunder 116-107 to take a 2-1 lead in the NBA Finals.
Haliburton scored 22 points and made 11 assists and nine rebounds as the Pacers overturned a five-point deficit going into the fourth quarter in game three of the best-of-seven series.
The Pacers bench outscored the Thunder by 49-18, with reserve Bennedict Mathurin contributing 27 points at Gainbridge Fieldhouse in Indianapolis.
"So many different guys chipped in," said Haliburton. "Ben Mathurin was amazing off the bench. We just had guys make plays after plays."
Mathurin said: "The main thing is you have to be resilient. You have to be the aggressor in order to win games."
The Pacers, who went into the game after a 123-107 defeat in game two, extended a run of not losing consecutive games since March.
Shai Gilgeous-Alexander, the NBA's Most Valuable Player, scored 24 points for the Thunder but only three in the fourth quarter.
Jalem Williams top-scored for the visitors with 26 points, while Chet Holmgren scored 20 points and made 10 rebounds for a Thunder side that gave up 19 turnovers which led to 21 points for the Pacers.
"In the fourth quarter I just thought they really outplayed us on both ends," said Thunder coach Mark Daigneault.
Game four will take place at the same venue at 20:30 local time on Friday (01:30 BST, Saturday).

Oklahoma City Thunder face the Indiana Pacers in the 2025 NBA Finals, starting on Thursday night.
The Thunder booked their place in their first national finals since 2012 with a 4-1 series win over the Minnesota Timberwolves in the Western Conference finals.
In the east, the Pacers beat the New York Knicks 4-2 to reach their second national finals and first since 2000.
Before the final, BBC Sport's Ask Me Anything team looks at what to watch out for in during the best-of-seven series.
How to watch the NBA finals
All seven matches of the NBA finals will be showing in the United Kingdom via TNT Sports and discovery+.

First-time hopefuls vs a 46-year wait
As far as historic NBA longevity goes, a final between the Thunder and the Pacers is one that is a surprise to many.
The Pacers are only here for the second time in their history, while the Thunder are only making their fourth finals outing themselves.
Spearheaded by Olympic champion Tyrese Haliburton, the Pacers are among the 10 active franchises never to win the NBA's national championship.
The Thunder's only NBA finals crown came in 1979 when they were the Seattle Sonics, meaning no Oklahoma-based side has won the competition.
The Larry O'Brien Trophy will head to a new state for the first time in either Indiana or Oklahoma.
Will SGA join the exclusive MVP club?
This season, Thunder point guard Shai Gilgeous-Alexander became the first Canadian to win the NBA's Most Valuable Player (MVP) award since Steven Nash in 2006.
A finals win with Olkahoma could also see him join an exclusive club with some of basketball's all-time greats.
Not since 2015 has the season MVP gone on to win the finals with their franchise that season, with the last being Steph Curry.
Better known as 'SGA', Gilgeous-Alexander is the third Thunder player to be named MVP after Kevin Durant (2014) and Russell Westbrook (2017).
SGA could join the likes of LeBron James, Michael Jordan, Shaquille O'Neal, Magic Johnson and Larry Bird as an MVP and NBA champion.
Thunder's 2-0 record vs Pacers
The two finalists have met twice already this season, coming in December in Indiana and March in Oklahoma.
On both occasions, the Thunder came out on top.
Between Christmas and New Year, the Thunder were 120-114 winners on the road and they beat the Pacers 132-111 in March.
During the play-offs, the Thunder recorded wins in 12 of their 16 games, including a 4-0 sweep of the Memphis Grizzlies in the first round. The Pacers have an identical record.
A major factor in the Pacers reaching a first finals in 25 years has been their ability to overturn games that have at times, seemed close to impossible to do so.
In game five of their play-off first-round meeting with the Milwaukee Bucks, the Pacers found themselves 118-111 down with 40 seconds of overtime remaining, only for Andrew Nembhard to nail a three-pointer and Haliburton to score five unanswered points for a 119-118 victory.
Trailing by 14 points in the third quarter of game two in the Eastern Conference semi-finals against the Cleveland Cavaliers, the Thunder were 119-112 down with 57 seconds left, but recorded a 120-119 victory as Haliburton found a three-pointer with one second remaining.
A hat-trick of memorable play-off comebacks again had Haliburton at the heart of it. In the first game of the Eastern Conference finals, the Pacers trailed 121-112 to the Knicks with 52 seconds remaining of regular time. As the buzzer sounded, Haliburton's long-range shot with one foot on the three-point line bounced up off the rim and dropped in for two points, sending the game to overtime before the Pacers won 135-134.
The Pacers could need their ability to dig deep into games against a Thunder side that averaged 3.1 more points per game than them in the regular season.
Thunder's home-court advantage
The Thunder have got the home-court advantage for the seven-game series, meaning they will host games one, two, five and seven, should all seven matches be required.
This is because the Western Conference champions had a significantly better record during the 82-game regular season, winning 68 matches to the Pacers' 50.
Since the Pacers' previous finals appearance in 2000, 16 of the 25 teams with home-court advantage have won the finals.
However, each of the 2024, 2023 and 2022 finalists with home-court advantage failed to make it count.
This article is the latest from BBC Sport's Ask Me Anything team.
What is Ask Me Anything?
Ask Me Anything is a service dedicated to answering your questions.
We want to reward your time by telling you things you do not know and reminding you of things you do.
The team will find out everything you need to know and be able to call upon a network of contacts including our experts and pundits.
We will be answering your questions from the heart of the BBC Sport newsroom, and going behind the scenes at some of the world's biggest sporting events.
Our coverage will span the BBC Sport website, app, social media and YouTube accounts, plus BBC TV and radio.

The N.B.A. Has a Star Problem
With LeBron James and Stephen Curry nearing retirement, the league has no clear next brand ambassador. Changing media landscapes and a new focus on team parity haven’t helped.
The N.B.A. Has a Star Problem
With LeBron James and Stephen Curry nearing retirement, the league has no clear next brand ambassador. Changing media landscapes and a new focus on team parity haven’t helped.
Oklahoma City Thunder guard Shai Gilgeous-Alexander won the league’s Most Valuable Player Award this year, led the league in scoring and helped drive the Thunder to 68 wins, the most ever in franchise history.Credit...Kyle Terada/Imagn Images
Who are these guys?
There’s no LeBron James, no Stephen Curry. No Lakers, no Knicks, nor even any Celtics. Neither of the teams — the Indiana Pacers or the Oklahoma City Thunder — had been in the N.B.A. finals for more than a decade. To the average sports fan, their rosters are largely unknown.
“I’m not sure I completely buy into the premise of your question,” said Adam Silver, the N.B.A. commissioner, when asked about a finals with limited star power. “I think Shai is an enormous star.”
He was referring to Shai Gilgeous-Alexander, who won the N.B.A.’s Most Valuable Player Award this year after leading the league in scoring and helping drive the Thunder to 68 wins, the most in franchise history. Silver also mentioned Tyrese Haliburton, the Pacers guard with a penchant for late-game heroics.
But even Silver acknowledged those players are lesser known outside basketball fandom than the league’s biggest stars. In some ways, that’s a product of what the league wants — for all of its teams, no matter how small the market, to have a chance at making the finals. But that change also conflicts with one of its major tenets — that star power sells.
Stars have fueled the N.B.A. since the 1980s. Larry Bird and Magic Johnson drove its stampede into the popular consciousness, and then Michael Jordan globalized the game. Stars drive viewership and interest, which in turn drive up the price of media rights deals, cash from sponsors, ticket sales and team valuations.
For the past decade, the league’s ecosystem has revolved around James and Curry. James is now 40 years old, and Curry is 37. The question of who will be the next face of the league, once those two have retired, has hung over the sport for years.
The league’s new push for parity could hurt its search for stars. Silver noted that part of what made Curry, James and all the superstars who came before them so popular was that they regularly played for championships. But the N.B.A. has deliberately made it harder to build a dominating superteam, and long strings of finals appearances are no longer the norm.
At the same time, audiences are shrinking. More than 35 million people watched Game 6 of the 1998 finals, in which Jordan won his sixth (and final) N.B.A. championship. In 2023, when the Denver Nuggets won their first championship, the series averaged 11.6 million viewers per game.
Winning alone does not guarantee the same amount of exposure as it once did.
To some extent, stars are made. When Victor Wembanyama, the Frenchman who is nearly seven and a half feet tall, was set to enter the N.B.A., the league promoted his games while he was playing in France.
How Much Do You Know About Fiber?
But talent and exposure can take a star only so far. The best player on the 2023 championship Nuggets team, for example, was Nikola Jokic, a Serbian center who has won the league’s M.V.P. Award three times and is one of the best to have ever played the game. But he had no interest in promoting himself and didn’t capitalize on the moment to build his brand.
Jaclyn Reilly, co-founder of Ethos Group, a brand strategy firm that works with the W.N.B.A. star Angel Reese, said the fracturing media landscape, with its ever increasing choices of content, made it more difficult for an athlete to stand out. “that’s why it’s even more important for the athlete to be strategic,” she said.
All eyes are on Haliburton and Gilgeous-Alexander. The Thunder have built a sustainable team that some expect to be championship contenders for years. That would give more exposure to Gilgeous-Alexander’s game play, his fun sense of fashion and his signature shoe with Converse. His profile has already risen this season.
For the Pacers,  Haliburton has created several viral moments this season. In a playoff game against the Knicks last month, he made an improbable shot at the buzzer at Madison Square Garden to send the game to overtime. Then he made a choking symbol with his hands, a homage to the former Pacer Reggie Miller, who directed a similar gesture toward Spike Lee, a Knicks superfan, 31 years ago.
Knicks fans hated that Haliburton did that — but they won’t forget it either.
This week, in Game 1 of the finals, Haliburton hit a jumper in the game’s final second that won the game for the Pacers, who had trailed by 15 points in the fourth quarter.
A performance like that, especially if it leads to a championship, just might be the kind that makes a superstar.
Haliburton walked into his postgame interview carrying a pair of his signature shoes from Puma, which he had worn during the game. Some reporters chuckled as he thumped the shoes down on the table, and Haliburton smiled sheepishly. But he wasn’t going to let a chance for that much exposure slip by.
IN CASE YOU MISSED IT
A feud between Elon Musk and President Trump escalated quickly. Tensions had been rising for days as Musk railed against the Republican policy bill and Trump pulled a close associate of Elon Musk’s out of the running to lead NASA. They reached a public breaking point on Thursday, when the president and billionaire entrepreneur traded insults and threats on social media. Tesla shares plunged more than 14 percent, rebounding slightly on Friday.
Trump had a “very positive” call with China’s leader. The president implied in a post on Truth Social that he and Xi Jinping had resolved issues surrounding mineral exports, which China recently halted to the United States. The conversation signaled a potential thawing in the relationship between the U.S. and China after weeks of escalating tensions. On Friday,  Trump said top U.S. and Chinese economic officials would hold talks in London on Monday.
The labor market stayed steady in May. Employers added 139,000 jobs last month and the unemployment rate remained 4.2 percent, the Labor Department reported on Friday. But the report also hinted at turbulence: Revisions showed employers added 95,000 fewer jobs in March and April than previously reported, and job growth was driven almost entirely by health care and social assistance, as well as leisure and hospitality.
A Supreme Court decision added more pressure on affirmative action programs. The unanimous ruling sided with a straight woman who lost positions to gay workers, arguing that the appeals court had been wrong to require her to meet a higher burden because she was a member of a majority group.
Is the W.N.B.A. underpaid? In an opinion article for The Times, Claudia Goldin, the Nobel Prize-winning economist, argued that the relatively smaller audience and business of the women’s league compared to the N.B.A. does not justify the extent to which its players are paid less. The W.N.B.A attracts about one-third as many viewers per player as the N.B.A., for example, but its average salary is 1/80th that of the men’s league.
Brands like Nike and Adidas sell digital versions of their sneakers in the video game Fortnite.Credit...Epic Games
Next, Calum Marsh, who has written about sneakers over the past five years, explains how brands are reaching kids with digital versions of their footwear.
I March, when Jordan Brand released the Air Jordan 4 “Brick by Brick,” a collaboration with the BMX athlete Nigel Sylvester, they sold out almost instantly, quickly doubled in value on the resale market and were championed by collectors as an early contender for sneaker of the year.
But for some sneaker fans, the real fun began two months later, when the “Brick by Brick” became available in Fortnite — as a fully digital replica that could be purchased for 1,000 “V-Bucks,” the game’s virtual currency, or about $8.99.
For gamers — especially kids — these digital sneakers represent a form of creative self-expression.
“The younger generation sees what happens on the internet as no less important than the offline world,” Funs Jacobs, a technology and culture strategist, said. “To older generations, it sounds insane, but it’s a bit of an identity thing.”
Digital versions of Nike sneakers in “Fortnite.”Credit...Nike
They’re also a big business. Fortnite, a free-to-play game, has more than 500 million registered users and an average of over two million active players every day. Its $5 billion in annual revenue comes almost entirely from the sale of virtual goods. Though Epic would not provide exact sales figures, a representative from the company said players had selected and applied Kicks to their avatars nearly seven billion times since November.
Epic and its brand partners divide the revenue from in-game sneaker sales. But the sneaker companies have a more salient motivation. Consumers have been losing interest in sneakers, as the frenzy for retro shoes whipped up during the pandemic has gradually abated. Putting sneakers in virtual worlds is a way to drum up interest among younger consumers, who may be converted into ardent sneaker fans because they saw the shoes in their favorite game.
“Gaming has emerged as a pivotal touchpoint in reaching and influencing Gen Z and Gen Alpha,” said Thomas Wehner, the global head of Adidas Gaming, pointing out that Adidas was eager to “authentically engage” with the “vast community, creativity and cultural relevance” offered by a game like Fortnite.
Credit...Epic Games
Younger audiences can be difficult for brands to reach through traditional media. Advertising in television, newspapers and magazines rarely reaches them, leading companies to look for opportunities across social media and video games for better reach.
“By partnering with Epic and Fortnite to launch Kicks, we’re meeting the next generation of athletes where they are — in physical and virtual spaces,” said Nikhil Pandit, global director of gaming partnerships at Nike.
The sneaker market is heavily nostalgia driven: Fans who grew up watching Michael Jordan in the ’90s have spent billions collecting his classic shoes. According to Nike, selling shoes in Fortnite is partly about the long-term payoff — it wants to build future nostalgia among a new generation who may one day want to buy the real-life version of the shoes they once owned in the game. But brands are also helping to facilitate the sale of real sneakers to those invested in the digital ones. Recently, Nike began offering customers who purchased digital sneakers early access to highly coveted shoes via their proprietary app — making it easy for a virtual customer to be converted into another real-life sneakerhead.
Quiz: most valuable sneaker
Idle time, a move to online shopping, and an increase in disposable income during the pandemic helped turn sneakers into an asset class, with the 2020 release of “The Last Dance,” an ESPN documentary about Michael Jordan, fueling skyrocketing resale values for Air Jordans in particular.
In 2023, the auction house Sotheby’s sold the most expensive sneakers ever, a pair of Air Jordan 13 shoes worn by Jordan during the 1998 NBA Finals. What was the price?
Thanks for reading! We’ll see you Monday.

For months, the Phoenix Suns and Kevin Durant have appeared headed to an inevitable divorce. The team has underperformed since acquiring Bradley Beal from the Washington Wizards, and KD (36) may have a new home in early July.
Several NBA teams have prioritized their fixation on Giannis Antetokounmpo of the Milwaukee Bucks and may hold back chasing Durant for even a long-shot chance at the younger (30) star.
Still, both are former NBA MVPs, and Durant averaged 26.6 points per game last year on 43 percent shooting from three-point range. He remains one of the league's best players.
As ESPN's Shams Charania wrote on Wednesday, those with interest "mainly feature the Houston Rockets, San Antonio Spurs, Miami Heat, Minnesota Timberwolves and New York Knicks."
How do those teams rank as viable Durant destinations, and what honorable mentions might make a run?
Durant will earn $54.7 million for the 2025-26 season, but he's earning $51.2 million through the end of June.
Most teams must wait until they have greater flexibility in July when hard caps reset and the salary cap jumps from $140.6 million to a projected $154.6 million. However, a deal can be agreed to before the draft and executed on July 6 after the NBA's annual moratorium.
To bring back Durant in June, a franchise must send out at least $40.7 million, provided they finish the deal below the first apron ($178.1 million) and can field a full roster under the 2025-26 first apron ($195.9 million). That required number climbs to $43.6 million in outgoing salary in July.
Or, depending on the month, a team can avoid the first-apron restriction entirely by trading away an amount equal to or greater than Durant's $51.2-$54.7 million. Remember that a second-apron restriction ($188.9-$207.8 million) is triggered by aggregation, like sending two players making $27.5 million apiece to get just over Durant's $54.7 million.
Similarly, the Suns cannot trigger any aprons as their current projected payroll for 2025-26 (roughly $228 million). A Durant trade may reduce that number to give Phoenix apron flexibility, but that would require additional team(s) in the trade.
Finally, trading for Durant will presumably come with an extension agreement in the $122-$124 million range. The former is more likely, since it can be executed immediately; the extra $2 million would need to wait six months for extend-and-trade restrictions to lift.
Honorable Mentions: Hawks, Nuggets, Mavericks, etc.
Several teams not listed by Charania could make a run at Durant. The Atlanta Hawks have players like Jalen Johnson, Terance Mann, Onyeka Okongwu and Zaccharie Risacher whose contracts could get the necessary salary (in various combinations).
The Denver Nuggets have minimal draft picks to offer, but Michael Porter Jr. would be Phoenix's primary piece in a multi-team deal.
While the Dallas Mavericks could find a way to make the math work, it would be extremely challenging to round out the team with Anthony Davis, Kyrie Irving (even if he opts out of $43 million to re-sign near $35 million on a longer deal), and Durant. No, the Suns aren't getting Cooper Flagg (presumably the No. 1 overall pick).
A surprise team could make a run, perhaps the Los Angeles Clippers, but it's the size of KD's salary that is a challenge for most.
5. Minnesota Timberwolves
The Timberwolves have several decisions this summer with three potential key free agents.
Julius Randle ($30.9 million) and Naz Reid ($15 million) may opt out of their final years, while Nickeil Alexander-Walker will be an unrestricted free agent.
The challenge is that only the Brooklyn Nets have significant spending power and may not target Minnesota's players. If not, the most it will be able to get elsewhere is the projected $14.1 million non-taxpayer mid-level exception, unless a team like the Detroit Pistons trades into cap room (possibly moving Isaiah Stewart II).
Assuming Anthony Edwards, Rudy Gobert, and Jaden McDaniels aren't available, the Timberwolves would need Randle to opt in to make a trade viable. Others such as Rob Dillingham, Mike Conley, Terrence Shannon Jr. or Donte DiVincenzo would need to be included as outgoing salary. Without Randle, Minnesota would need to include one of Gobert or McDaniels.
The greater challenge is draft compensation. Outside of Nos. 17 and 31 in the draft, most of the Timberwolves' future picks are spoken for. On paper, a deal between the two seems built on the concept that Phoenix really wants Randle (and he opts in).
4. Miami Heat
The Heat have a non-lottery first (No. 20) and can offer two more (2030 and 2032). The draft compensation may not be overwhelming, but that depends on how much other teams will forgo for a 36-year-old star.
Miami can include veterans like Terry Rozier, Duncan Robinson and Kyle Anderson to reach the necessary salary for Durant. However, Phoenix may need a third team to avoid apron restrictions. Andrew Wiggins is another possibility, along with younger players such as Jaime Jaquez Jr., Nikola Jović and/or Haywood Highsmith.
Durant has a say in where he wants to play, and if that's with Bam Adebayo and Tyler Herro for a coach like Erik Spoelstra, the Suns may find they're compelled to send Durant to Miami (depending on how hard he chooses to ward off other suitors).
3. New York Knicks
To make the money work in a deal, the Knicks would need a third team, including OG Anunoby and Mikal Bridges. The machinations would be similar to how New York would acquire Antetokounmpo. Phoenix could take back one of Anunoby or Bridges, but not both.
Bridges was initially sent from Phoenix to the Brooklyn Nets in 2023, so it would be poetic to return, though the Suns may prefer Anunoby and the draft compensation Bridges might yield from a third party like the Memphis Grizzlies.
The Knicks used most of their draft capital to build the current squad with Karl-Anthony Towns and Bridges, but then Phoenix may prefer win-ready veterans instead of picks.
2. San Antonio Spurs
The Spurs sent some draft compensation to acquire De'Aaron Fox before the trade deadline, but they still have plenty to offer Houston, including Nos. 2 and 14 in the draft.
Would they go that far for Durant given Victor Wembanyama (21) and current NBA Rookie of the Year Stephon Castle (20) are so young?
Castle may not be available, even for Antetokounmpo. Still, there's a world where San Antonio believes Durant has three still-elite years in him that could power the team to postseason success, which may mean giving up the lottery picks.
The Spurs also have the Atlanta Hawks' first in 2027 and enough draft compensation to get something done without Castle.
The more challenging aspect might be finding the necessary salary to acquire Durant, which presumably requires a combination of Devin Vassell, Keldon Johnson and possibly Harrison Barnes.
The Spurs have more to offer regarding immediate draft compensation than the Houston Rockets. The rest is more subjective based on player preference.
1. Houston Rockets
The Houston Rockets are well-positioned to go star hunting this offseason. Will they go all-in on Durant or save their available war chest for Antetokounmpo?
The path to Durant could take many forms, but it most likely needs to be in July since Houston is close to its first-apron hard cap.
While the team could opt Fred VanVleet into his expiring $44.9 million for 2025-26 and trade him with Dillon Brooks, the sense among many competing executives (willing to share their opinions on the Rockets) is that the franchise wants to keep much of its experienced core together as possible for a substantial playoff run.
Houston is likelier to send VanVleet into free agency but re-sign him on a more economical multi-year deal. Instead, the expectation is that Jalen Green will be made available, along with players on flexible contracts (Jock Landale, Aaron Holiday, etc.) and inevitably some of the younger talents (Reed Sheppard, Cam Whitmore, etc.). The Rockets also have the No. 10 pick to offer, along with several future picks (firsts and seconds).
Sheppard might be necessary for Antetokounmpo, but it's unclear how far Houston will go for Durant. Regardless, Alperen Şengün and Amen Thompson are off-limits.
The Rockets don't appear eager to part with Jabari Smith Jr. and Tari Eason, though their extension demands this summer may dictate how vital they are to the team's future.

Kevin Durant Trade Reportedly Not Being Pursued by Knicks amid NBA Landing Spot Rumors
The New York Knicks have been rumored to be interested in pursuing a star player this offseason, but one veteran reportedly isn't on their list of desires.
Stefan Bondy of the New York Post reported on Wednesday that the Knicks "are not in the mix" for Phoenix Suns star forward Kevin Durant, who is one of the top trade candidates on the market this summer.
Earlier on Wednesday, ESPN's Shams Charania listed the Knicks among the five teams that "have expressed interest" in trading for Durant along with the Houston Rockets, San Antonio Spurs, Miami Heat and Minnesota Timberwolves. Charania noted that the Suns "have met multiple times over the past week" with Durant's business partner, Boardroom CEO Rich Kleiman, to discuss trade scenarios.
It appears that New York is no longer on the table as a potential landing spot for Durant, as Bondy reported that a league source said the team "will not be dealing for the future Hall of Famer." The Knicks reportedly had interest in signing Durant when he was a free agent in 2019 before he chose to join the crosstown rival Brooklyn Nets, and Bondy noted that his father, Wayne, was "pushing him to join the Knicks at that time."
Durant is set to make $54.7 million for the 2025-26 season, which could cause teams to shy away from trying to acquire him. After July 6, he will also be eligible to sign a two-year contract extension worth up to $112 million. That figure increases to $124 million if the extension is signed six months after a trade is completed.
The 36-year-old is still regarded as one of the best offensive players in the league, and he's surely motivated to chase his third career NBA championship. While the Knicks are also in "win-now" mode, it appears they will be making other pursuits this offseason in hopes of achieving their ultimate goal.

The Wild West of NBA Jump Balls
Joel Crawford had a bone to pick with Shaquille O’Neal.
Crawford doesn’t remember the year, though he thinks the encounter likely occurred before one of numerous playoff games he officiated featuring Shaq. As players warmed up pregame, Crawford approached the legendary big man with a long-standing gripe surrounding an embedded basketball tradition: the jump ball.
“I noticed, ‘Goddamn it, he’s stealing my toss. He always steals my freaking toss!’” recalls Crawford, one of the most demonstrative and recognizable officials in NBA history, and now a referee developmental adviser for the league.
Crawford is referencing a simple jump ball rule that requires players to wait until the ball has reached its apex before they touch it. “Stealing” the toss before that point is one of many tactics that players throughout history have used to get a leg (an arm?) up on fellow jumpers. Crawford and other referees always come back to Shaq as the most effective jump ball thief of his time—able to tip the ball early, but not so quickly or obviously that it drew a whistle.
But on this night, the NBA officiating legend wasn’t having it.
“I walked out and I just looked at him and I said, ‘You’ve been stealing my tosses. [But] you’re not getting it tonight,’” Crawford says. “He just looked me right in the eye and said, ‘It’s my job to steal it.’”
Just a few minutes later, Crawford was eating his words. “I threw [the ball] up, and I just barely got it up” before Shaq stole it, he says.
It probably looked something like this—the ball hardly out of Crawford’s hands before a lightning-quick O’Neal smacked it out of the air:
NBA
The Wild West of NBA Jump Balls
Basketball’s most iconic tradition is also one of its oldest and most curious events, characterized by the same foggy rule interpretations, quirky styles, and chicanery as the first jump balls ever tossed
Daniel Hertzberg
Joey Crawford had a bone to pick with Shaquille O’Neal.
Crawford doesn’t remember the year, though he thinks the encounter likely occurred before one of numerous playoff games he officiated featuring Shaq. As players warmed up pregame, Crawford approached the legendary big man with a long-standing gripe surrounding an embedded basketball tradition: the jump ball.
“I noticed, ‘Goddamn it, he’s stealing my toss. He always steals my freaking toss!’” recalls Crawford, one of the most demonstrative and recognizable officials in NBA history, and now a referee developmental adviser for the league.
Crawford is referencing a simple jump ball rule that requires players to wait until the ball has reached its apex before they touch it. “Stealing” the toss before that point is one of many tactics that players throughout history have used to get a leg (an arm?) up on fellow jumpers. Crawford and other referees always come back to Shaq as the most effective jump ball thief of his time—able to tip the ball early, but not so quickly or obviously that it drew a whistle.
But on this night, the NBA officiating legend wasn’t having it.
“I walked out and I just looked at him and I said, ‘You’ve been stealing my tosses. [But] you’re not getting it tonight,’” Crawford says. “He just looked me right in the eye and said, ‘It’s my job to steal it.’”
Just a few minutes later, Crawford was eating his words. “I threw [the ball] up, and I just barely got it up” before Shaq stole it, he says.
It probably looked something like this—the ball hardly out of Crawford’s hands before a lightning-quick O’Neal smacked it out of the air:
It’s perhaps unsurprising that O’Neal stands as the most dominant jump ball taker in modern NBA history, winning more than 75 percent of his tips since data became available in play-by-play logs in the late 1990s. “He was huge and incredibly athletic,” you’re thinking. “Of course he was the best at winning jump balls.”
But to many of the game’s longtime stewards, there’s more to it. Shaq and other jump ball specialists through the years have employed a blend of gambits in pursuit of victory: timing, obsession, and, yes, a willingness to push the boundaries of the rule book—and dare referees to push back.  
The jump ball is simultaneously one of basketball’s oldest traditions and one of its most curious regular events. Each jump ball is its own game-within-a-game, at once a primal contest of athletic prowess and a constantly evolving game of chicken between players and refs—and among jumpers themselves. There’s at least one jump ball in every single NBA contest, and most have a limited impact on the winner; rare exceptions, though, come at huge moments and can swing games.
And in today’s modern, increasingly standardized game—especially where referees are concerned—the jump ball is also a persistent vestige of a bygone era. It’s among the last true Wild West frontiers in basketball, marked by the same foggy rule interpretations, quirky styles, and sense of lawlessness that characterized the first jump balls ever thrown.
How has the jump ball endured for more than a century? How have Shaq and other elite practitioners bent and even broken the rules to gain an edge, and do referees have enough tools and incentives to stop them? Will the jump ball always be a central part of the NBA game? Should it?
James Naismith himself threw the first jump ball in basketball history back in 1891. It’s been a fixture of the sport ever since.
Naismith’s original vision for the sport featured a jump ball at the start of each quarter and after every made basket. This was scaled back at the NCAA level in 1937, when the ball started being awarded to the scored-upon team after buckets.
The NBA used this approach from its inception in 1949 until 1975, when it removed jump balls to start quarters two through four and installed the system we know today: one jump ball to begin each game and any overtime periods, plus a jump ball for any tie-up during play. (The loser of the opening tip receives the ball to start the second and third quarters; the winner gets it again to start the fourth.)
Even when they were more common, jump balls were never a major priority of NBA referee management. Some refs threw with one hand, almost mimicking a jump-shot motion. Others threw with two, and still others used hybrid approaches that involved bouncing or tapping the ball. 
The NBA has never mandated any standardized mechanics for throwing jump balls. “It was not a front-burner thing,” says Ed Rush, a legendary referee who also served as director of officials for the NBA after leaving the court. “It was just one of those things where they basically said, ‘You have to be able to do this.’”
This affords refs a bit of individual personality in their tosses, and no one has embodied that like Ken Mauer. Nearly every ref surveyed for this story mentioned Mauer when asked to recall the most singular jump ball tossers they’d seen.
Mauer, a longtime fixture in playoff and Finals games, used an extreme variation of what’s termed the “pulling” technique in officiating circles, where the referee backs their body out of the circle while throwing. Mauer explains that he was elbowed by jumpers a few times early in his career and needed to find a technique to avoid that risk without compromising the effectiveness of the toss. Where some refs pull slightly, though, Mauer took multiple steps back, then tossed at an angle with a surprise motion that almost made him look like a volleyball player setting the ball for a teammate:
Mauer’s peers talk about his toss with a mixture of reverence and amusement. The thing just looks goofy.
was effective, though. “The jump ball doesn’t have to be thrown straight,” Mauer says. “The jump ball has to end up in the middle of both players at the peak of where the ball should be tapped. It doesn’t matter where you toss the ball from.”
NBA management has historically agreed with Mauer’s sentiment. As long as the ball goes where it’s supposed to, the brass doesn’t care how it gets there, or even who throws it—while crew chiefs are the most common throwers, they can defer to another ref on the staff if their toss is considered superior.
Some officials defer based primarily on physical safety; several former refs carry horror stories with them from the jump ball circle.  
“We were working the old Eastern league. That’s where people worked before you go to the NBA,” Rush says. “[The jumpers are] sorta leaning on each other; I’m physically getting in between them.
“And as the ball went up, [a guy named] McCoy reached out to go get his arm up to the ball, and he hit me in the side of the head. Blood all over the place, I had a broken nose. After that, I had what golfers would call ‘the yips.’”
And as the ball went up, [a guy named] McCoy reached out to go get his arm up to the ball, and he hit me in the side of the head. Blood all over the place, I had a broken nose. After that, I had what golfers would call ‘the yips.’
Ed Rush
Rush rarely threw another jump ball in a 30-plus-year career, deferring to his partners whenever possible. Stories like these are common among old-time officials: Fellow legend Steve Javie even recalled one game when a referee was taken off on a stretcher after being knocked out by an errant elbow on a jump ball.
“Some of them might have been intentional by the player,” joked Don Vaden, former NBA referee and director of NBA officials who now works as a “ref whisperer” for various NBA teams.
Other veterans defer the toss as a sort of tongue-in-cheek rite of passage, a way to mess with their rookies.
“Guys would sit there and say, ‘Hey, Steve, I’m a really good tosser. I can do it.’ I said, ‘OK, fine, go do it,’” Javie recalls playfully. “His first toss, I’d be the non-tossing official and I’d blow it back and go, ‘Nope, off on the right.’ He’d throw it up the second time. ‘Oh, off on the left.’ … Just to bust his chops.
“I would never do that [on a jump ball] at the free throw circle when the game was on the line. But just to have some fun with the tossing official at the beginning of the game.”
Training for jump ball tosses has been similarly ad hoc. Just a couple of rudimentary drills have been passed down the officiating ranks over the years.
“One is you stand underneath the basket, and you toss the ball so it goes up through the rim, so that way you know you’re straight,” Rush says. “And the other one is to get next to the wall and toss the ball so it goes straight up in the air a few inches from the wall, but doesn’t touch the wall.”
From the grading of every single call to the use of virtual reality and other cutting-edge approaches to referee training, most elements of NBA officiating have been fully modernized—and with good reason. Rules should be applied uniformly to any game, especially one with billions of dollars at stake.
Not the jump ball, though.
Jump ball training for today’s officials? It’s the exact same as it was in the mid-’60s, with refs standing under a hoop and tossing the ball up through it. There are still no standardized leaguewide mechanics for throwing a jump ball. And while other decisions that refs make throughout a game are analyzed with numerous camera angles and slow motion, jump balls simply don’t receive the same level of attention.
“We’re not capturing every jump ball, rating it A, B, C, D, E, grading it 1 to 10, anything like that,” says Steven Angel, the NBA’s senior vice president of game analytics and strategy—the man in charge of the team that grades referees. “When there’s an issue, we would forward that on [to referee management].”
Instead, jump ball techniques have been passed down communally among officials for decades.
Much of that has coalesced around the concept of misdirection to prevent jump ball “stealing,” which Shaq and other top jumpers throughout history are so practiced at. It’s difficult to gauge the expected apex of a tossed ball, especially with two giant people leaping after it directly in your line of sight; savvy players know this and constantly test the limits. In the NBA’s nascent days, referees collectively realized that keeping players off guard—forcing them to jump a beat or two later, as the toss was already in the air—was their best chance at consistently getting the ball to its peak.
Every ref develops their own nuanced style. Crawford had a method of moving his head side to side, ostensibly checking all 10 players, before suddenly tossing the ball up with two hands. Rush would talk to the jumpers, then toss mid-sentence to surprise them; Javie and current NBA ref czar Monty McCutchen would also bounce the ball while talking, randomizing their bounce height and the number of bounces to keep players guessing.
Vaden would wait until both jumpers were set, then rock forward on his feet as if to throw the ball—typically fooling both players and getting them on their toes. “As soon as they both rocked back and got low, I would throw it,” Vaden says. Zach Zarba, one of today’s elite NBA officials, who has called several consecutive Finals, uses a similar extra pause.
This is a tougher task than meets the eye. Refs work hard to avoid tipping their hand (literally). A key goal is to eliminate any downward motion directly preceding the toss.
“When you bring it down, now [jumpers] know it has to go back up,” Zarba says. “If you load up on your jump ball—when you start to throw if you crouch down, or bring the ball down in any way—they are good enough to time that.”
There’s another simple reality at play here, too: Jump balls have no standardized height. Most jumpers for the opening tip will be around 7 feet tall, sure, but what about various exceptions? Multiple former refs joked about their relief at never having to toss a jump ball for Victor Wembanyama—how do you calibrate consistently for that? (If you’re wondering, Wembanyama is 38-20 in the circle so far in his rookie year, an elite 65.5 percent figure.) What about when two 6-foot guards are jumping after a tie-up? Tosses to a typical height will be too high.
That’s of particular concern for taller refs like Kevin Cutler, a 6-foot-8 former player at Long Beach State and in the Drew League. Cutler uses a modified one-hand toss that’s well above his head when the ball is released, quickly putting it well above most jumpers. Cutler rarely gets his jump ball stolen as a result, but does occasionally deal with a ball falling back down, untouched—maybe not ideal, but still preferable to concerns about theft that other officials deal with.
(In fairness to Cutler, what exactly were the two jumpers in that clip doing?)
Even those issues are rare for Cutler, who is considered one of the premier jump ball throwers in today’s officiating ranks.
He showcases the work many refs put in behind the scenes to master their craft. Cutler’s height makes the traditional “throw the ball up through the basket” practice technique less useful; he’s already nearly at the rim with his tossing hand. So for years, Cutler would get up at 4:30 a.m. to enter an empty aerobics room and practice using his own self-taught methods.
“You find a point on the ceiling or the roof and you toss to that point,” Cutler says. “As long as you cannot see that point on the ceiling, up and down, you’ve got a good toss.”
Cutler’s dedication has paid off. His reputation precedes him with most fellow referees; even when he’s not the crew chief on a given game (Cutler is among a tier of refs who will sometimes play this role, but also sometimes be the no. 2 on a staff), he estimates that he’ll be asked to throw the opening jump ball 85 to 90 percent of the time—a real point of pride.
That pride is visible across the officiating ranks. Like most fellow referees, Mauer thinks of the jump ball toss as a skill to be honed through repetition. But he also considers it a lasting scrap of referee personality worth holding on to.
“I’m not a believer that you have to make referees robots, in more ways than just throwing the jump ball,” Mauer says. “Yes, rules and regulations and certain mechanics have to be standardized and carried out by all referees, but the individuality of a referee—I hope that is never completely taken away. And yeah, one little minor way might be to throw a jump ball.”
Refs aren’t the only ones building unique, personalized strategies around the jump ball circle, however.
Be honest: If you were speculating about which of Shaq’s contemporaries were similarly dominant jump ball winners, Yao Ming would be among your first guesses. Yao was one of the only guys to ever truly tower over O’Neal on a basketball court—surely his size allowed him to easily win most tips?
Not so much.
While Shaq won over 76 percent of his jump balls in our data set (which is scraped from play-by-play logs and goes back to 1997), highest among all volume jumpers, Yao posted 207 wins and 288 losses, a paltry 41.8 percent win rate. This dichotomy between two of history’s biggest players makes it clear: There’s more to jump ball success than height and heft.
It all starts with timing. The best jumpers know refs are trying to surprise them; they don’t fall for various distracting tactics. Look how much sooner Shaq was in the air on this jump ball than his opponent—it was over for poor Matt Geiger before he even left the floor.
That’s Crawford on the toss. Was that another of Shaq’s thefts prior to the apex? It’s truly hard to tell, even in slow motion.)
“He had it timed so well that he could get it,” Crawford recalls. “He may have had [other refs] timed, too.”
Through Turner representatives, O’Neal sadly declined an interview request for this story. Others have taken on his mantle, however—and pushed it even further, in some cases.
Andre Drummond, who boasts a 563-203 career jump ball record (73.5 percent), sits second behind Shaq for winning percentage among players who primarily jump at center court. The Chicago Bulls center is a timing savant, consistently off the ground before his opponent:
That’s no accident, either. Drummond tells The Ringer he regularly completes tennis ball drills and other exercises to keep his reflexes sharp. “My reaction time is what I really depend on,” he says.
Drummond is also a studied practitioner of the jump ball dark arts, one of the best at toeing the line between legal and illegal. He’s a regular jump ball thief, including some examples that are almost hilariously quick (but again, are almost never called):
He’s also an expert at leveraging his combination of bulk and athleticism. Knowing he’ll typically be first in the air, Drummond will often jump subtly into his opponent’s airspace, turning his shoulder and torso to limit his opponent’s jumping height and retaining his high ground
This is where the jump ball really turns into a cat-and-mouse game. Timing the ref’s toss is imperative, but what if the other guy times it—and you—even more effectively?
There’s an implicit understanding among all parties that jump ball infractions aren’t usually called to the letter of the rule book, especially opening tips, when subsequent-quarter possession will even out anyway.
“You’ll see bad tosses that are either too low, too high, or they’re not straight, that should be called back and they’re not,” Rush says. “It’s almost like you don’t want to start the game off on a negative note or hurt your fellow official’s feelings.”
The data paints an even starker picture of lawlessness in the jump circle. Of 1,986 jump balls logged by Angel’s team for the 2022-23 season, just six violations were called. That’s a rate of 0.3 percent, or a violation once every 331 jump balls. This figure doesn’t include “re-tosses,” when the official restarts the entire process with a new throw even though there’s no player infraction, but anecdotally these are similarly rare. A Wild West, indeed.
As such, top jumpers have developed their own hacks to push the envelope.
“I know when I play against Steven Adams, he likes to hold arms down with his off hand to get to the tipped ball,” Drummond says.
(It works, too. Adams’s 70.7 percent career win rate is in the top 10 among modern volume jumpers.)
“Some guys like to use their arm and put it in front of yours so they can tip it back,” Drummond continues. “There are different strategies for how you can get an advantage when it comes to jump balls. And a lot of it depends on the ref and how they throw it. You can prepare all day, but if they throw it slightly to the other side, the advantage is immediately gone.”
Some jumpers, such as perennial MVP candidate Giannis Antetokounmpo, often favor the forward tap. Antetokounmpo’s 76.1 percent career win rate, which trails only Shaq’s since 1997, is somewhat artificially inflated by the fact that most of his jumps come on tie-ups and therefore are often against smaller opponents.  
But with such a huge advantage, Giannis uses the jump ball for predatory purposes. When he notices players crowding the circle behind him, expecting him to tap the ball back, he sometimes executes planned actions to manufacture a quick bucket. Notice how teammate Bobby Portis boxes out the man next to him as this ball goes up, knowing Giannis is about to tip it forward to him for a layup
These sorts of circle alignment tactics are another frontier exclusive to the jump ball. If an elite jumper or a major height advantage is in the circle, should the opponent stack players to the side he usually wins to? Or could that risk exploitation from savvy leapers like Giannis?
There are actual rules here: For tie-up jump balls at either free throw line, the team attacking that basket gets to place the first player around the jumping circle, with each team alternating one player at a time from there. But it’s common for players to, shall we say, temporarily forget these rules (some may never have learned them), especially for a jump ball late in a close game.
Speaking of rules, here’s one you likely didn’t know: It’s perfectly legal to tip a jump ball into the opponent’s basket. While no one interviewed for this story could recall a successful tapped jump ball bucket, several refs figure it’s only a matter of time before some savvy giant like Antetokounmpo, Wembanyama, or Chet Holmgren pulls it off. In an extremely short shot clock situation, when winning the tap to a teammate and getting a shot off is unrealistic—and especially with the height edges these guys so often have—why not take a shot at two points?
There are different strategies for how you can get an advantage ... . And a lot of it depends on the ref and how they throw it. You can prepare all day, but if they throw it slightly to the other side, the advantage is immediately gone.
Andre Drummond
Jump ball nuance reaches peak nerd status, however, when you talk to NBA coaches. Some analytically inclined bench bosses really go galaxy brain.
“In theory, if you lose the [opening] jump ball and you get the two-for-ones at the end of the first and second quarters, you now have two opportunities to maybe get three-for-one instead of two-for-one since you get the ball back [to open the second and third],” says Utah Jazz coach Will Hardy. “So there are some people who might even argue that losing the jump ball is OK from a possession standpoint, if your team is really good at manipulating the two-for-one. We’re going down the rabbit hole now.”
Clippers coach Ty Lue takes it further: He roots against his center at the opening tip, saying he’d rather get the ball in the second and third quarters. This is much to the chagrin of said centers, including Ivica Zubac.
“I know [Zubac’s win rate] is not good,” Lue says with a chuckle. (He’s right. Zubac has a career jump ball record of 171-244, or 41.2 percent.) “I wasn’t going to say that, but I know. He knows as well. He gets mad every time he loses it, and I’m happy.”
Those high jinks naturally go out the window in overtime or during tie-up jump balls, which don’t even out possession-wise later in the game. A jump ball late in a close game is one of the most intense events you’ll see in the NBA.
“Say there’s a held ball out on the perimeter and you have a tie game and there’s 12 seconds to go, and now you have a jump ball,” Crawford says. “Around that circle, you have mayhem.”
It can take refs minutes to legally position players around the circle, and then reset them as guys try to jump in early. When possession can be the difference between a win and a loss, toss theft risks are sky high—as are things like arm contact, hold-downs, and more.
This is one of the most challenging play types a referee can face. Elite athletes are springing to action at full intensity all around them, with injury risk certainly heightened. Then there’s the simple matter of timing.
“If you’re in the middle tossing the ball, and there’s two seconds left on the shot clock and the offensive team gets the ball back, you have a responsibility to get out of the way, number one, and to actually help referee the play that’s going to take place,” Vaden says.
These instances are so challenging, in fact, and so meaningful to games when they happen, that some in the officiating world are uncomfortable with them. Should referees even play such a direct role in these moments?
When the NCAA moved from jump balls on tie-ups to the use of the possession arrow in 1981, the reasoning was clear: Those in charge did not believe referees could consistently throw quality tosses that maintained fairness.
“We had several crucial moments down at the end of some games where the jump ball was thrown lousy—didn’t get up high enough, or didn’t give everybody a chance,” says Hank Nichols, a longtime NCAA official and Naismith Hall of Famer who served as the NCAA’s coordinator of officials after leaving the floor.
Nichols also noted the general chaos inherent to many tie-up jump balls. To him and many others in officiating circles, fairness is better served with a neutral arbiter like the possession arrow. (FIBA also uses alternating possession.)
“There’s nothing really wrong with everybody sharing the next possession,” Nichols says. “It’s a fair deal. You don’t have to deal with a bad toss, somebody stealing the thing illegally on the jump ball, pushing people around—you don’t have to deal with any of that. That’s the reason they changed it, and in my opinion it’s stood tall as a rule change.”
Should the NBA consider a similar move?
Most parties agree that jump ball tosses are imperfect, but their degree of concern varies. Some, like Vaden, estimate that 15 to 25 percent of jump ball tosses are bad; others like Hardy think it’s closer to 50 percent. What to do about these and other jump ball issues, if anything, is another question with varied answers. 
I know [Zubac’s win rate] is not good. I wasn’t going to say that, but I know. He knows as well. He gets mad every time he loses it, and I’m happy.
Ty Lue
Vaden prefers the possession arrow, citing both the chaos and time wasted setting up for many tie-up jump balls. Rush doesn’t love the jump ball, but prefers it to the alternative in fairness to the athletes.
“Let’s say you’re behind by a point, and you’re playing great defense and you’re fighting like crazy and you get a tie-up and then you don’t have the arrow,” Rush says. “It’s kinda like, life’s not fair here because you’re not getting the ball.”
Some traditionalists like Mauer never want to see the jump ball changed. They view it not just as the fairest approach, but also as a longtime league practice that makes the NBA unique—and allows refs to retain that little bit of personality on the floor.
Crawford has perhaps the most nuanced take: He’d support changing the jump ball rule if it were truly unfair, but has yet to see enough evidence of that.
“If it’s proven that our staff sucks at tossing the balls—first quarter, overtime, [tie-up] jump balls—then we should change it,” Crawford says. “I think [we should change it] if you can actually prove that.”
Crawford may get his wish sooner than expected. Per Angel, jump ball tosses are one of several areas being probed by league data engineers utilizing new 3D skeletal pose tracking from Hawk-Eye. As long as some initial issues with this system are ironed out, jump balls could soon be evaluated for horizontal and vertical planes, toss angles, apex measurements—and perhaps even actual metrics to determine whether one jumper was favored over the other on a given toss.
But would that really be a good thing? Should yet another basketball frontier be stolen (pun definitely intended) by our machine overlords, or even removed entirely from major moments?
Maybe not. The craft and art of the jump ball have been passed down among officials and players alike for more than a century. This game-within-a-game has become one of the sport’s oldest and most iconic traditions, with flaws that only augment its charms. To many in this world, that’s worth holding on to even as the game evolves around it.
“It’s part of the game, always was,” Mauer says. “I hope they don’t get rid of things like that.”End of article
Thanks to Taylor Snarr and Patrick McFarlane for research assistance.
Ben Dowsett is a freelance NBA writer based in Salt Lake City, with past work at ESPN, The Guardian, GQ, and elsewhere. He specializes in stories about tech, officiating, and the curious corners of the sports world.

The Making of Dwyane Wade
NBA athletes who retire generally find life to be easier than it was while they were active. Not so much with Dwyane Wade. For The Atlantic, D. Watkins traces Wade’s path from South Side Chicago to the heights of success, at which point the athlete’s real work began—on himself. An uncommonly vulnerable and forthright profile.
Growing up, Wade saw competing versions of what a man was supposed to be. He saw men putting their hands on women, men fighting each other, men drawing guns. He also saw his own father get up at five in the morning every day to take the train to make deliveries for a printing company. Wade Sr. demanded that the kids use ma’am and sir in the house. He made them clean the bathrooms and wash the dishes. Wade Sr. took pride in providing for his family. But Wade never recalls hearing him say the words I love you. “It was a lot of tough love as a Black man in America,” Wade told me. “At that time, wasn’t a lot of hugs going around for a lot of young boys in the community that I had.”
On a Sunday in October, a group of spectators gathered outside the Kaseya Center, the home of the Miami Heat. They sat in rows of chairs, arranged in a half circle. The crowd was there for the unveiling of a statue of Dwyane Wade, the superstar who had led the team to three NBA championships.
I wasn’t enough of a VIP to get a seat, so I found a spot on a gate during the unveiling, behind Wade and his family. I knew he had been anxiously awaiting the day. I’d watched, eight months earlier, as he’d paced around an early clay model in the sculptors’ studio, asking detailed questions—about the definition of his arms and legs, the way his jersey would be rendered. I knew how much this statue meant to him. And I knew he thought it captured him, as a player, perfectly.
The statue was made by Rotblatt Amrany Studio, a firm that has designed monuments to some of the most well-known athletes in America: Ernie Banks, Barry Sanders, Michael Jordan, Kobe Bryant. When I’d visited the studio, in the Chicago suburbs, the sculpture of Wade ended at the wrists. I’d asked a member of the studio’s team where the hands were; he’d explained that the sculptors still needed more reference photos. “Wade has really, really big hands,” he’d said. “The biggest hands on a human that I ever saw.”
At the unveiling, flames shot up into the air and two black panels that had been concealing the statue slid apart. When the smoke cleared, there it was: a bronze behemoth, muscles rippling, Heat jersey clinging to the torso, hands appropriately disproportionate. The sculpture was based on a moment in a 2009 game against the Chicago Bulls. In the second overtime, Wade stole the ball and made a running, game-winning three-pointer as time expired. He then leaped onto the scorers’ table and yelled, “This is my house!” The face of the sculpture was a rictus of fury, with furrowed eyebrows and bared teeth. It also looked nothing like Dwyane Wade.
Read: The worst statue in the history of sports
Wade took the podium and shook his head in awe. “Who is that guy?” he said. The comment was intended as a statement of humility—I can’t believe that’s me—but laughter rippled through the crowd. “I don’t know who that guy is either,” someone near me whispered. On social media, the statue was immediately mocked. “Why they make Dwyane Wade look like Laurence Fishburne?” one sports reporter posted on X. Others compared the likeness to Thanos, or to the villain from The Mask.
To Wade, if the sculpture looked strange or monstrous, it befitted that moment in his career: an outburst of raw competitive energy, a pure expression of the rage that had driven him on the court. “It’s not a beauty shot of me,” he later told me.
Wade took the response to the statue in stride. “I saw some funny shit along the way about it,” he said. “That’s just the world we live in, man.” But perhaps behind the jokes was a recognition of a different kind of dissonance. Wade’s public image today is far removed from that 2009 moment, so much so that the two can be hard to reconcile. Maybe it wasn’t just the statue that was strange. Maybe people didn’t quite recognize the person the statue was meant to immortalize.
Ayear earlier, as I prepared to meet Wade for the first time, my usual barber took his wife on a cruise. I needed a cut, so I had to do the unthinkable: trust a stranger with my thinning hairline. I wandered into an unfamiliar barbershop in my hometown of Baltimore. The vibe of the spot was revolutionary; the walls were lined with faded posters of Malcolm X, Huey P. Newton, Chuck D, Nas. The barbers all wore dashikis or T-shirts that celebrated the motherland.
The man who stepped up to cut my hair told me his name was Power. Just Power. We made small talk, other guys chiming in. Eventually, as barbershop conversations do, the talk drifted to the NBA, and how the NBA of today is nowhere near as hard as it used to be. We talked about the days when Michael Jordan would get assaulted by the “Bad Boy” Pistons and still drop 50, about how you can barely touch another player nowadays without being ejected.
Read: How the economists took over the NBA
“Them kids softer than baby shit!” a UPS driver with a tight gray afro said. “I can play in the league now!” We all laughed.
I couldn’t help myself. I mentioned that I had an interview scheduled with Dwyane Wade. On the court, Wade had been one of the last avatars of the old-school way of hooping we’d just been reminiscing about, a warrior who played hurt and held grudges. But at the mention of Wade, the mood in the room immediately shifted; all around me, eyebrows raised. “Be careful around those Hollywood Negroes, brother,” Power warned me in a low tone. “Wade used to be a good brother. He hit Hollywood and he changed.”
Wade has the kind of NBA origin story that would ordinarily make him a hero in a room like that one. He grew up on the South Side of Chicago, at the corner of 59th Street and South Prairie Avenue. His mother, Jolinda, struggled with drug addiction. The police raided their apartment so often that it became a familiar routine: Wade and his older sister Tragil Wade would escape through a back door and scale an outdoor stairway to their grandmother’s back porch, on the top floor of the same building, where they could hide. Other times, Jolinda wouldn’t come home. Wade could never sleep well when she was in the street, so even as a kid, he would sit outside late at night, waiting for her.
He was too young to understand why chaos reigned in his home and community, but Wade found early on that basketball was the perfect way to disappear, to get lost in something that demanded all of his body and mind. At first, he was too little to play on the South Side courts for real, so he would go with his dad to the playground and use anything he could as a hoop. He scored on baby swings, between the rungs of monkey bars, on milk crates.
That’s how it started. Now Wade has seen the highest reaches of American athletic success: All-Star, All-Star MVP, scoring champion, NBA champion, Finals MVP, Olympic gold medalist. Yet as intense as he may have been on the basketball court, in the six years since his retirement, he has presented a different face to the world—one that doesn’t fit with a certain narrow way of thinking about how a Black man should carry himself.
Wade and his wife, the actor Gabrielle Union, talk about their marriage as an equal partnership. For a long time, they insisted on splitting their finances 50–50. (Once, during an argument, Wade reminded Union that they were in “my house that I paid for.” She looked at her husband and replied, “You will never say that to me again.”) In 2020, Wade’s daughter Zaya came out as transgender, and he has very publicly supported her; last year, he won a Daytime Emmy as an executive producer on a short documentary about the fathers of trans kids. And those massive hands, which once authored ferocious dunks, are now immaculately manicured, the nails often painted. When Power said Wade had changed, this is what he meant.
One night last year, I sat in a plush room at Fiserv Forum, in Milwaukee, and watched a woman empty the largest Chick-fil-A bag I’d ever seen onto a countertop: sandwiches, boxes of nuggets, packs of waffle fries. A nearby fridge was stocked with juices, sparkling water, and white wine. Fiserv is Marquette University’s home court. A group of school employees, sitting in leather chairs around the room, fidgeted while they waited for Dwyane Wade to arrive.
In 2003, Wade led Marquette to the Final Four, its first trip since the team had won its sole championship, in 1977. Wade’s team lost in the semifinals to the Kansas Jayhawks, but he left Marquette as a legend. In 2007, the school retired his jersey. Now, nearly two decades later, he was being honored for a $3 million donation, which would support a reading program, scholarships, and an expansion of the men’s-basketball facilities.
From the October 2011 issue: The scandal of NCAA college sports
Wade arrived with a small entourage (the Chick-fil-A was for them), and the room buzzed. He greeted me and leaned in for a shake; his hand eclipsed mine, almost reaching my wrist. He was dressed in black from neck to toe—black shirt, flared black pants, black socks, and black sneakers. On his head sat a cream cap with a black D in the center. Chin up, with perfect posture, he walked down a long hall toward the donor dining hall, where some of Marquette’s wealthiest alumni awaited him.
Wade, towering over everyone, was greeted by applause. He started his brief remarks with a joke about how he had finally given enough money to enter this room. Wade spoke passionately about his love for Marquette and how the school had changed his life. He didn’t, however, say much about what that life had been like before he got to college.
I imagined how strange it must be for Wade: all these white faces celebrating you as one of their own. No one else in that room had once been a skinny Black kid who lived where Wade lived and saw what he saw. He gave them a story they could comprehend—the truth, but not the truth.
I had struggled, at first, to get past such carefully constructed surfaces with Wade. In many respects, my own background is similar to his. He’s from the hood. I’m from the hood. We came of age around the same time, in places that many white people talk about like they’re alien worlds. It might sound strange, but I’ve found that Black people from poverty are often more cagey, more on guard, when talking with a Black writer from poverty. Maybe it’s because I know what’s beneath the success stories that get packaged for white audiences. Or I could be there with an ulterior motive, trying to prove that Wade has sold out—that he is “Hollywood” now. I’ve come to think of this kind of reluctance as the “Black Wall.”
Slowly, though, the wall started to come down, and I got a very different account of Wade’s life from the one he’d shared with the Marquette donors. When Wade was about 8 years old, he went to live with his father in Robbins, a small town on the outskirts of Chicago. Despite everything he’d gone through on the South Side, Wade didn’t want to leave; he was protective of his mother. His sister Tragil, then 12, had to trick him into leaving. She told her younger brother that he was just going to Robbins for a visit. He went for a ride, and that was that.
In Robbins, Wade lived with his father, stepmother, and four stepsiblings. Robbins was mostly Black, a place built by Black people who were tired of racial conflict in Chicago. One of Wade’s best friends in town, though, was white. “I’d never had a white friend before,” he told me. “It was different going over to his house after school some days and shit, you know what I mean? It was way different than my house. After school, there was food waiting for him, and the house was clean.” Wade commuted to a racially diverse school in Chicago, where he was quiet and shy. “My confidence was low because my shoes got holes in them,” he told me. When he wore white socks with his black shoes, he’d use a black marker to darken the sock where it showed through the holes.
Wade’s father was a standout baseball player in high school, and he’d dabbled in just about every sport except basketball. But after a stint in the Army, he came back to a Jordan-era, basketball-crazed Chicago and decided to be good at hoops. He dominated pickup ball around the city and its suburbs, and the boys in his house took after him. They played on a hoop their father had built in the driveway beside their house in Robbins. Dwyane Wade Sr. was a relentless coach. “He 6 foot 3, muscles, had a mean streak,” Wade told me. “Damn right, I’m listening to my dad. I had no choice. I was scared of my dad.”
“He brought that military background to everything we did,” Wade said. If Wade Sr. got it in his head that his son had to make a certain number of shots, he wouldn’t let it go. “We could be out there all night,” Wade said. “And I would cry through it; he didn’t care.” He often resented the pressure. “I’m talking about my shoulder hurting, my hand hurting, I’m hungry, I’m thirsty, whatever; he didn’t give a fuck. And so that was tough as a kid, because at that time, you want to do it, but you don’t want to do it that long. You don’t want to act like you’re training and really working at the game. You just want to play it.”
Tragil often visited the house in Robbins. She saw how hard her father pushed her brother. Wade Sr. made his son play against kids who were older and bigger than he was. In one game, playing as a fifth grader against eighth graders, Wade missed an easy shot. “Dwyane missed that left-hand layup; he couldn’t go left,” Tragil told me. “So Daddy made him stay out on the court until he got it right. He was crying and everything, but he learned to use that left hand.”
Growing up, Wade saw competing versions of what a man was supposed to be. He saw men putting their hands on women, men fighting each other, men drawing guns. He also saw his own father get up at five in the morning every day to take the train to make deliveries for a printing company. Wade Sr. demanded that the kids use ma’am and sir in the house. He made them clean the bathrooms and wash the dishes. Wade Sr. took pride in providing for his family. But Wade never recalls hearing him say the words I love you. “It was a lot of tough love as a Black man in America,” Wade told me. “At that time, wasn’t a lot of hugs going around for a lot of young boys in the community that I had.”
Even as Wade grew into his powers as a high-school player, his father continued to push him. “My dad was so intense that by the time Dwyane got in high school, he wasn’t allowed to come inside the gym,” Tragil said. “He was always trying to coach from the sidelines, so they ended up banning him from home games.”
Although Wade dreamed of playing college ball at Michigan, the school didn’t recruit him, because his ACT scores were too low. But Tom Crean—Marquette’s head coach, who was in his second year of transforming the program into a contender—had heard stories about the all-state shooting guard from Chicago, and decided to reach out. On June 25, 2000, just as the window to call high-school players officially opened, Crean contacted Wade at the home of his high-school sweetheart, Siohvaughn Funches. Funches’s mother told Wade to pick up the phone, and Crean sold him on becoming the cornerstone of the team he was building.
Wade wasn’t academically eligible to play as a freshman, and had to spend the year getting his grades and test scores up. That same year, his mother was incarcerated on drug charges related to crack. He wrote to her in secret, never telling anyone what was going on.
At first, Wade said, he used all the adversity as motivation. On the court and, for the first time, in the classroom, he tried to channel his anger and hurt: “He’s not this; he’s not that. He will never be this; he will never be that.” Wade drilled and studied. He spent hours overhauling his shot. He wasn’t allowed to travel with the team, but Crean sat him on the bench during home games and made him take notes. Wade was allowed to practice with the team, and it was clear that, even as a freshman, he was the best player out there.
“I was doing stuff that they couldn’t do,” Wade told me, “and I was like, Oh, wait, I’m different, you know what I mean?” His mother got clean in prison and was released just in time to see him play his first game, his sophomore year. Jolinda started her first ministry in prison, and years later Wade would buy her a church on the South Side.
Wade was 20 years old, a sophomore at Marquette, when he became a father himself. Funches gave birth to their son, Zaire, in 2002, and Wade and Funches married a few months later. Fatherhood overwhelmed Wade at first. Every bit of his financial aid went to diapers and baby food. “I was broke as hell in college, bro,” he told me. “I’m talking about broke broke.”
But Wade knew money was coming. The Miami Heat drafted him after his junior year. In that crowded class of prospects, each star had his own identity. LeBron James was the chosen one; Carmelo Anthony was the tough Baltimore kid who could get a bucket anywhere. Wade was the ruthless, hard-driving warrior. “I don’t give a fuck. I’m a savage,” he told me. “Especially if I felt like you crossed me or you said something to me I don’t like. I’m out here to win. I get dirty if we gotta get dirty.”
Before drafting Wade, the Heat had suffered two consecutive losing seasons, prompting the head coach, Pat Riley—who’d never had a single losing season before—to resign. But in Wade’s rookie season, the team advanced to the second round of the playoffs, where it faced the Indiana Pacers. Wade announced his arrival as a star by slashing through the lane, leaping over the Pacers’ center Jermaine O’Neal, and slamming the ball like he wanted to tear the rim off the backboard.
Though James is the most decorated player of his era, Wade was the first of his contemporaries to achieve team success in the NBA. In his second year, he made the NBA All-Star and All-NBA teams, and he and his new teammate Shaquille O’Neal led the Heat to the Eastern Conference Finals. The next season, in June 2006, with Riley back on the sidelines, Wade carried the Heat to the NBA Finals.
For me, the moment Wade became Wade was in that series, when the Heat played Dirk Nowitzki and the Dallas Mavericks. Miami went down by two games early, and nobody thought they would win the series. From the third game on, though, Wade seemed possessed. He hit mid-range jumpers; he got to the basket; he dunked on defenders’ heads; he made his free throws. Wade scored 157 points over the last four games, all Heat wins, and turned in a damn-near-perfect performance in the elimination game, playing with relentless energy on both sides of the ball. He brought Miami its first championship trophy and became one of the youngest NBA Finals MVPs ever. In just a few years, Wade had gone from an underrecruited high schooler to one of the highest-profile stars in the NBA.
When Wade had entered the league, baggy, untucked dress shirts and oversize suits were the style on draft night; on game days, players draped 5XL sweat suits and Mitchell & Ness throwback jerseys over their lanky frames. At the beginning of the 2005 season, then–NBA Commissioner David Stern implemented a dress code. It was unpopular and even deemed racist by many—a white commissioner forcing a league of predominantly Black millionaires to wear business casual. Wade, however, embraced the new restrictions. The next year, his tailored suits and taste for designer fashion landed him on Esquire’s best-dressed list.
Today, the NBA’s “tunnel walks” are like runways, with avant-garde couture, designer bags, and, yes, painted nails. But Wade recalls how the media jumped on him when he started to experiment with his fashion. “I remember in the early stages, if I wore a color, if I wore pink pants, they were talking about it like it was the worst thing ever,” he told me.
Wade wanted to be presentable, whether he was wearing sneakers and sweats or expensive sandals. But, like dancers, professional basketball players tend to have twisted and mangled feet, often crowned with discolored and bruised toenails. Wade had a solution for getting his feet together—he started to get pedicures, and had his toenails painted.
In 2007, Wade and Funches had another child, Zaya, but then separated that same year. Their divorce was a bitter tabloid saga, and their custody proceedings were among the longest in the history of Cook County. In 2011, Judge Renee G. Goldfarb granted Wade sole custody of both children, and they moved in with him. Zaire struggled with the change; he had been, he told me, “a momma’s boy,” and he worried that he was abandoning his mother. Basketball often kept Wade away from home, a fact that Goldfarb had considered. “But, to posit that he does not have the time to be a primary parent is incorrect,” she wrote. “He has the time if he makes the time.”
Dwyane, Zaire, and Zaya were all young, all still learning how to talk to one another. “I just was like, All right, I don’t know what the hell I’m doing,” Wade told me. He thought of his father’s emotional distance. He wanted to do things differently. “Me, I’m kissing you on the forehead,” Wade said. “I’m coming in there, I’m tucking you in at night. I’m coming off the road at three in the morning. I’m coming in to show you love.” He bought Zaire, then about 11, a blank notebook and told him to write down his feelings. Zaire told me, “I would leave it under his door, and then, whenever he would get back from a road trip, he would see it, open it, write his own thing, leave it back under my door.” Zaire, now 23, thinks the diary was crucial in helping him through his preteen years. “It was good,” he said, “ ’cause I never really knew how to express by talking.”
When Wade was in his mid-20s, his NBA career at its peak, he met Gabrielle Union, who’d starred in Bring It On, Bad Boys II, Daddy’s Little Girls, and Deliver Us From Eva, at a Super Bowl party. “She was different,” Wade said. Union was already an established presence in Hollywood, and he liked her confidence and independence. “She had her own bread, you know what I’m saying? She had her own swag.” During a break with Union, Wade had another son, Xavier, with a different woman. Eventually he and Union reconciled, and they were married in 2014; Union became a bonus parent to Zaire and Zaya. (Xavier is primarily raised by his mother.) That year, Wade was awarded full custody of his nephew Dahveon Morris. Four years later, Wade and Union welcomed a daughter, Kaavia James.
When Zaya first came out to Wade and Union as transgender, Wade was confounded. Nothing in his upbringing had prepared him for the experience of having a trans daughter. After Zaya was born, he had started planning for another generation of Wade basketball dominance. “When I had two boys, I was like, I got two chances at the NBA,” he said. Unlike Zaire, who dreamed of playing basketball, Zaya had never been interested in it. Sometimes, she’d come home, take off her school clothes, and put on a wig, heels, a dress. Back then, Wade admitted, he didn’t really know what being transgender meant.
Zaya, who turns 18 this year, told me she was afraid of what her father would think. “I was so scared,” she told me. “Everyone’s scared about coming out to their parents, and yeah, my parents are from Chicago. Chicago’s not the most, you know, I mean, you know … Like, in that moment, he had to make a choice: Do I stay in my beliefs from my childhood, or do I grow and expand and evolve in order to be a better dad for my kid? ”
It took Wade time to fully understand Zaya’s identity, and how to be her dad. He thought about how impossible her life would have been under the circumstances of his childhood. “I thank God all the time that I was able to be in a position in life that I was able to be in, but also that I was put in a position to be Zaya’s dad,” Wade told me. “If she grew up in my situation, forget about it. You’re either going to kill yourself, hurt yourself, or you’re going to keep that shit tucked in when you’re growing up like that; you’re not telling everybody.”
Wade and Union called their friends Magic and Cookie Johnson for advice. Their son, EJ, had come out to his family as gay when he was 17, and Wade remembered watching Magic talking about EJ in an interview with Ellen DeGeneres. “Well, I think it’s all about you not trying to decide what your daughter or son should be, or what you want them to become,” Magic had told DeGeneres. “It’s all about loving them, no matter who they are, what they decide to do.” He continued: “If you don’t support them, who’s going to support them and love them?”
Wade recalled thinking that Magic had navigated these interviews gracefully. “It was about EJ; it wasn’t about Magic,” he told me.
The Johnsons encouraged Wade and Union to relocate from Florida to California, where Zaya would have more community and a friendlier environment. The Wades decided to make the move, and the Johnsons helped them find a school that would be comfortable for their daughter.
After Zaya came out to the public, in 2020, Wade also went on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to express his support for her. Later, he talked about what it had felt like for him to see the fear in her face when she told him she was trans. “I had to go look myself in the mirror and ask myself: Why was my child scared, scared to tell me something about herself? ”
But, elsewhere within the family, the news did create turmoil. Shortly after Zaya came out publicly, her mother attempted to block her legal name and gender change until she turned 18. In court documents, Funches claimed that Wade was “positioned to profit from the minor child’s name and gender change with various companies through contacts and marketing opportunities.” She expressed her concern that Wade might have pressured Zaya into coming out, and said media attention would exacerbate that pressure. (Funches and her lawyers did not return requests for comment.)
It is true that as Wade’s daughter, Zaya might be one of the most visible young trans people in the world (she walked the runway during Paris Fashion Week in 2023, and landed the March 2025 cover of Seventeen magazine), but that prominence has also often made her a target. When she came out, the rapper Boosie BadAzz was incensed. “Like, don’t address him as a woman, dog,” he said in an Instagram video. “He 12 years old. He don’t, he’s not—he’s not up there yet.” The rapper Young Thug also weighed in on Twitter: “All I wanna say to dwade son is ‘GOD DONT MAKE MISTAKES’ but hey live your true self.”
Wade does his best to tune out the bullshit, but he can’t stop his kids from seeing every slight or attack. Yet Zaya says that he’s made their home a sanctuary for her, and in doing so has given her the comfort to succeed. “If a father wants some advice,” she told me, “it’s all about making sure your kids feel loved and they feel accepted and they’re protected and they’re safe.” For Zaya, this is a basic tenet of fatherhood, no matter who your children are, or what happens in their life.
The challenges of protecting a world-famous trans daughter aside, Wade is trying to navigate the basic father-teen dynamics. One day, he decided to surprise Zaya by picking her up at school. “I was coming from a meeting and I was dressed rather nice and I was in my Maybach,” he said. Zaya was outside with all of her friends; Wade was blasting music with his windows down and got out of the car. “I was just hanging on the car, like, ‘Hey, Zaya.’ ” She and her friends saw him and laughed. When she got in the car, Wade said, “I was like, ‘Did I look cool?’ She’s like, ‘Yeah, Dad, you looked cool.’ ”
Once, long after Wade had left 59th and South Prairie, his mother told him a story. Back in those early years, when she was dealing with drug addiction, Wade’s father would drive to her neighborhood after work, looking for her. When he found her out on the streets, he’d sit with her for a bit and ask her if she needed anything before he went home. As bad as their relationship was, she was his kids’ mother, and he wanted to make sure she was okay.
It took Wade a while to fully appreciate his father, to understand why he’d been the kind of parent he was. Wade Sr. drilled into his son the competitive drive necessary to become an elite athlete, and his ex-Army toughness taught Wade about respect. “When I got coaches—when I got high-school coaches, eventually college coaches, NBA coaches—I already had that respect built in, and it was built in from my dad being my first coach.”
In 2023, when Wade was inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, he gave a speech thanking his teammates, his coaches, Marquette, his family. Finally, he asked his father to stand up. “The hard work I put in is because I didn’t want to let you down,” he said. “Those countless hours in the backyard where we would compete against each other like strangers—it built me to last.” In the audience, Wade Sr. nodded slowly, his hands clasped. “I admired you as a kid,” Wade said. “I admire you now.” Then he invited his dad to join him onstage. “This one is for my father,” he said. “I love you, and I’m thankful for you.” They pulled each other into a hug. “I love you too, man,” Wade Sr. said.
A few months after the Hall of Fame ceremony, I spoke with Wade Sr. over Zoom. He still seemed to be reeling from that speech. “I wasn’t prepared for it,” he said. “That was an incredible, surreal moment.” We talked about how, when his son was growing up, priorities seemed clear-cut: “Staying away from the gangs, which is, you know, on the next block, and then, you know, the next block, and the next block.” For Wade Sr., the primary goal was staying alive. He tried to teach discipline above all. “I’ve always wanted to be a strong father,” he told me.
But there is plenty about Wade’s life that his father can’t quite grasp. Wade Sr. knows that his son goes to therapy, which he still can’t wrap his mind around. “I’m not going to talk to nobody about Dwyane; that’s who I am,” he said, referring to himself. “If I can’t understand me, how I’mma expect somebody else to understand me? So I try to keep it in-house.” But some men are just built differently, Wade Sr. tells himself. With his son, he said, “I’ve always tried to instill: Be better than me. I really think that, in a way, he took his own path.”
There’s still no shortage of old-school discipline and hardness about Wade. In January, he publicly revealed that he’d had surgery to remove a cancerous tumor from his kidney in December 2023. “I think it was the first time that my family, my dad, my kids, they saw me weak,” Wade said on his podcast. “That moment was probably the weakest point I’ve ever felt in my life.” He had carried that weakness privately, never mentioning it to me over the course of our many conversations, or to anyone outside his family.
 thought back to the barbershop, where so many people had opinions on how Wade went about his career and his life. Everyone in the shop knew how they would handle marriage, fatherhood, and a post-NBA career if they were in Wade’s shoes. They would be better Dwyane Wades than Dwyane Wade.
Just a couple of weeks after Wade had that secret surgery, we loaded into a black SUV and drove to the South Side.
We were going to Wade’s childhood home, where he’d lived with his mother. The higher the street number, the more abandoned the blocks seemed to be. And I don’t mean abandoned by the people—they were out, even though it was freezing. I mean abandoned by the city. Well-manicured businesses and beautiful homes on clean, trash-free streets slowly turned into fast-food chains, and then run-down local storefronts, and then not much of anything—a different Chicago.
I was riding in the back seat with Dwyane and Tragil. Both were in a reflective mood. Tragil recalled how Dwyane, at age 4, had figured out how to cross a busy street and walk to a corner store called Miss Pearl’s so he could buy Little Debbies.
“Look to the left,” Tragil said. “You see that garage?”
“Yooooo, the garage,” Dwyane said.
“That was Miss Pearl’s,” they said, nearly in unison, laughing.
The darker memories came, too. Dwyane talked about the fights he got into with different boys in the neighborhood; the police raids where cops busted into their home, arresting every adult inside. As they passed another building, Dwyane motioned out the window. “This is where I used to watch my mom—and, like, she ain’t know I used to see her; she used to be shooting up.”

Dwyane rested his chin on his hand.

“We coulda stayed here, and we coulda struggled,” Tragil said.

Dwyane nodded. “This coulda just been our life.”

We arrived at 5901 South Prairie Avenue, a big three-story building that sat on a corner. Its black gate was wide open.

“They didn’t have this gate when we lived here,” Tragil said. “Remember how the cops always tripped on that top step because it was never fixed?”

“Remember the time we were running from the cops, and you fell?” Dwyane said. “I looked back and you was gone.”
We jumped out of the SUV. Tragil pointed to a spot where there’d once been a bush in which dealers used to hide drugs. Dwyane walked around the outside of the building, taking photos. Brother and sister kept sharing flashbacks, finishing each other’s stories as their eyes welled. They paused, wiped their tears, and continued to bask in nostalgia. We walked through the gate up onto the porch. Even though the step had been fixed, somehow I still tripped on it, just as the cops had.
Wade showed me a scar on his head, and gestured toward a railing he’d once fallen from. “I didn’t go to the hospital,” he laughed. “I was told to put some water on it, maybe a little alcohol, even though I had a concussion.”
I tried the building’s front door, and to our surprise, it was open, so we went in. Like excited kids, we ran up and down the central staircase, trying doors on each landing, but they were all locked. On the middle floor, where Wade’s cousins used to live, a Ring camera had been installed. Wade looked directly into it and said hello multiple times, pressing the button, but no one answered. After trying every other door in the building, we went back outside.
Tragil looked up the rent for one of the building’s apartments: $1,400 a month. “They tryin’ to gentrify,” Wade said.
We got back in the car. In those South Side days, Wade said, “I just felt out of control of my life.” He reminisced about how he used to sit on the building’s porch, watching the rain. “I saw the same things I just seen. Like, it doesn’t look that different,” he said. “But my thoughts were different. I was, you know, thinking of a better life.” He wouldn’t relive those years for anything. But he believes they taught him patience, how to work hard and wait. Now he’s trying to teach his kids the same thing. It’s not easy: “They don’t have it,” he said. “Like, my son wanted to be in the NBA at 18. And he expected that. He has no patience.”
Years ago, he’d taken Zaire to see 5901 South Prairie, though they hadn’t gone inside; they’d taken a photo on the front steps. Dwyane wondered aloud how his younger children—whose lives couldn’t be further away from this place—might react to seeing it now. “I would love for them to walk through it.”
Wade gazed out the window at the South Side as we rode back to the other side of town, past the empty lots and the run-down buildings. “That’s what the American dream is, though,” I said. “You bust your ass. And then your kids get to have a different experience.”
Wade smiled wide and nodded. “Yeah,” he said.

A Car Ride and a Game 7 Loss That Activated Nikola Jokic Into an MVP
IT WAS A suggestion at first. The kind of thing a friend brings up during a long car ride when there will be plenty of time to discuss it. And in the winter of 2019, Denver Nuggets strength and conditioning coach Felipe Eichenberger had his pick of long car rides to the airport with star center Nikola Jokic to choose from.

The two had grown close in the four years they'd worked together. Eichenberger spent a month with Jokic in the big man's native Serbia each offseason. Jokic was present when Eichenberger's daughter was born -- and for all of her birthday parties afterward. Before games, Jokic often went into Eichenberger's office to escape the noise of the locker room.

Jokic had started talking with his friend and training coach about getting in better shape. He would text Eichenberger a bodybuilding video and would then joke he wanted to look like that someday. Or he'd mention that his knees or back hurt after games and would ask Eichenberger if losing weight might help with that.

For years, Jokic had been told by coaches, executives and talking heads in the media that he needed to get in better condition if he wanted to succeed in the NBA. But now it was coming from within.

It was time for Jokic to hear this.

"You can be MVP in this league," Eichenberger told him.
Jokic had just been named to his first All-Star team. He had won a Player of the Week award in early February. The Nuggets were in first place in their division. Everything was trending upward. Which meant it was time to start pushing Jokic to an uncomfortable place: superstardom.

"He got mad at me," Eichenberger says, laughing at the memory. "He got pretty heated. He's like, 'That's not the player I am. I pass more than I score. ... I'm not selfish.'"
For those who know Jokic, who will be playing in his first NBA Finals against the Miami Heat beginning with Thursday's Game 1 (8:30 p.m. ET, ABC), this was not an unexpected response.

"I never coached Tim Duncan, but I always compare him to Tim Duncan," Nuggets coach Michael Malone tells ESPN. "He's just a selfless superstar who's almost embarrassed by the attention.

"He's not beating his chest, saying, 'Look at me.' He's saying, 'Hey, look at us. This is a group.'"

Eichenberger knew going into the conversation he might touch a nerve. But that was the point. And the ride to the Denver airport was at least 25 miles. So he dove in further.

"I knew he wanted to work," Eichenberger says. "He was always willing to work."

So rather than try to untangle the self-consciousness that the MVP talk was triggering, Eichenberger laid out a plan for Jokic to transform his body.

Focus on the work, not what it means to be an MVP.

Jokic thought about it for a little bit before answering.

"OK," he said. "Let's do it."

After every game, no matter how many minutes he played, they'd lift weights. He would change his diet, cutting out as many indulgences as possible, which meant no soda, no beer, no snacks while he played video games.

An exception was made for orange juice and the occasional bite of his mother's cooking, when she visited from Serbia. But just a bite. "I actually told him to enjoy his mom's food after games," Eichenberger says. "Like, come on, you can't not eat your mother's cooking."

"But once he gets something in his head," Eichenberger adds, "that's how it's going to be."


OVER THE REST of that 2018-19 season, Jokic adhered to this routine religiously, even lifting after playing 64 minutes in a four-overtime loss to the Portland Trail Blazers in Game 3 of their Western Conference semifinal series.

Denver ended up falling to Portland in seven games, and while Jokic led the team in every category -- averaging 27.1 points and 13.9 rebounds in 42 minutes a game -- he had worn down as the series went on.

By the end of Game 7, he had nothing left. He missed seven of 10 shots in the fourth quarter, unable to carry his team across the finish line.

It was a devastating defeat. The Nuggets had been up by 11 points at home midway through the third quarter. All they had to do was finish and they'd be in the Western Conference finals against a Golden State Warriors team that was dealing with injuries and chemistry issues.

Afterward, as Malone huddled the Nuggets coaches in the locker room, they heard a knock at the door.

It was Jokic. He had come to tell them he'd never let that happen again.

David Adelman remembers the sentiment in Jokic's voice as much as what he said.

"He was emotional when he came in," said Adelman, the lead offensive assistant coach for the Nuggets. "I think he felt like he wore down in the second half, and we all looked at him like, 'Joker. You carried us through this whole process.'

"The responsibility he has for us is different than maybe any player in the NBA. He can be our center. He can be our point guard. He can play the wing. He can be a catch-and-shoot guy. He's playing every part of the floor."

But Jokic was not interested in any consolations. He had finally felt what he and Eichenberger had been talking about: Everything he had was not enough to win. There was another level he needed to get to.

"I mean, he gave everything he had possible," Adelman said. "But then I think he, in his mind, thought, 'Maybe I can give more. Maybe if I get in even better shape. Maybe if I do this.'"

And so he did.
BY THE TIME Jokic returned to training camp in fall 2019, the change in his physique was striking. He was leaner and stronger, having lost 20 to 30 pounds while gaining muscle everywhere. The effect of this change became immediate on the court. Jokic played in every regular-season and playoff game, finishing ninth in MVP voting and leading Denver to the Western Conference finals in 2020.

"He lost 10 pounds, and he's like, 'It feels good.' He lost 20 pounds, and he's like, 'Wow. I can dunk now?'" Eichenberger said. "He lost 30 pounds. Like, 'Wow. I can really sprint.'"

During the four-month shutdown because of the COVID-19 pandemic, Jokic kept training and eating healthily. So much so that photos of him taken at a gym in Serbia went viral on social media.

Was that Jokic or tennis player Novak Djokovic?

Former teammate Jameer Nelson texted Jokic immediately after seeing the photos.
"When you do something like that, you deliver a message to your teammates," Nelson told ESPN. "When you do something for your body or your mind like he did, the way he did it, everybody gets stronger."

Nelson, a 2004 first-round pick and 2009 All-Star, had played with Jokic in Denver from 2015 to 2018, and like most people who knew Jokic early in his career, he cannot say he saw this kind of transformation coming.

"His skill level was high," Nelson said. "But obviously, I didn't know he'd be an MVP."

At the beginning of Jokic's rookie season in 2015, Nelson had organized a voluntary camp for the team near his home in suburban Philadelphia right before training camp.

He put guys up at the local Marriott hotel, put them through his offseason conditioning workouts at a local gym, then organized paintball and golf outings during their free time. Jokic was just looking to make an impression and, hopefully, the roster that fall.

There were no coaches there. But toward the end of the week, then-Nuggets general manager Tim Connelly called Nelson to check in.

"Who looks the best?" Connelly asked Nelson.

"The foreign kid," Nelson told him. "I don't really know his name, but once he learns English and gets in better shape, he's going to be really good."

JUSUF NURKIC WAS one of the only people who knew anything about Jokic when he came to Nelson's camp that fall. They'd played against each other in the Adriatic league as teenagers.

But whereas Nurkic, the Bosnian center, had been invited to the green room in New York as a projected first-round pick in 2014, Jokic was asleep back in Serbia when his name was finally called late in the second round, while the broadcast was airing a Taco Bell commercial.

"He played exactly the same style as he does now," Nurkic told ESPN. "But it was a different type of basketball. The pace was totally different. So I don't think people could really see what he could be."
It is important to remember this about Jokic's background when you hear him talk now. He'll say he never expected to make it to the NBA, much less win two MVP awards, and people assume he is just being modest.

But this is not an act. He's just modest.

You notice it as he covers his mouth when he has to talk about himself publicly. Or in his self-deprecating jokes about his English or always being a bit off-balance on the court.

On Saturday, prior to the 2023 NBA Finals, he was asked when he realized it might be possible for him to win an MVP award one day and whether it was true Eichenberger had planted that seed.

"I mean, still isn't," he said with a shrug. "But yeah, that's true. Felipe was the first guy who told me I was going to be an MVP. It was a car drive to the airport. I remember ... I was laughing.

"To be honest, I'm playing the same way since my days in Sombor [Serbia]. I didn't change. Maybe I upgrade a little bit, but I didn't trade my style or play since day one."

Jokic is underselling himself. Of course he has upgraded since coming to the NBA. He has transformed his body from a chubby, soda-guzzling teenager into a fit, 28-year-old, triple-double generator.

"He's an ultra-conditioned athlete now," Malone said after the Nuggets beat the Los Angeles Lakers in the Western Conference finals. "The guy can play for minutes on top of minutes and play at a high level.

"He made that turn. And his dedication from that point on has allowed him to become a two-time MVP."

THE NIGHT THE Nuggets swept the Lakers to advance to the NBA Finals was supposed to feel like a culmination of everything Denver had been through. For the faith the Nuggets had shown in their core of Jokic, Jamal Murray and Michael Porter Jr. over the previous five years. For the patience they've had through significant injuries and setbacks. For the vision they'd had in drafting those players in the first place and the way they've built around them since.

But Jokic found himself strangely unsatisfied and restless during the long break they had until the start of the Finals.

"To be honest ... I thought it was going to be a much bigger feeling," he said on Saturday. "Yes, we won the game, and I was really happy. Yes, we made history. This, that. But next year, nobody is going to remember us. Maybe if we win it all, maybe it's going to be different."

Adelman is not surprised to hear Jokic in such a reflective mood. Over the six seasons he has coached him, there have been many conversations like this.

After the team lost its final regular-season game in 2018 at the Minnesota Timberwolves, Adelman remembers Jokic coming to the back of the team plane and sitting with the coaches to discuss the campaign and where the team could go from there.

"He really takes stock and ownership of what he just experienced, and he likes to talk it out," Adelman said. "I think that's why we've grown steadily as a group, is having a person that's your leader who thinks that way."

Jokic did this before he was a leader too.

He even did it as a rookie, when it became clear his presence had disrupted Nurkic's development.

Nurkic had been a friend and a mentor to Jokic, helping him acclimate to life in the NBA and America. But there wasn't room for both of them in the starting lineup, and within a few months, it was clear Jokic was the team's center of the future.

There were no hard feelings, Nurkic said. He just wanted to be somewhere he could start, so he asked for a trade. Jokic understood, but he didn't think it had to come to that.

"He went to the coaches and offered to come off the bench," Nelson said. "Like he really didn't care about starting. It didn't matter to him. He just wanted everybody to be happy."

Nurkic said he never knew Jokic offered his starting spot back then. He just knew his friend wanted him to stay and believed they could play together.

"We still talk about what could have been," Nurkic said. "But everything happens for a reason. I'm happy with my career. And I'm happy for him too ... His story is really amazing."

FOR THE MOST part, Jokic lets others tell his story. Coaches, former teammates, friends.

"I think probably my family, my close friends ... you need to ask them," Jokic said, when asked whether he has changed since the spotlight started shining on him. "But they are not going to answer you."

He is aware that this is a funny answer because people in the room laughed afterward. But he also has to know he isn't giving the most satisfying answer to an audience that is accustomed to superstars delivering those lines.

It's hard to know what to do with someone who doesn't bask in the attention the NBA spotlight creates.

But that's not his problem to solve.

The night he was named the MVP of the Western Conference finals, the story was LeBron James talking postgame about possible retirement.

But if Jokic had a reaction to James stealing his thunder, nobody heard it. He reads books, not his mentions, having deleted all his social media years ago.

"Maybe someone should actually start to address that, like, being humble is a virtue," Nuggets assistant coach Ognjen Stojakovic told ESPN. "That it's OK to be humble, be a hard worker, be a good person."

Stojakovic has known Jokic since he was a teenager making his way through the Adriatic league. He knows where Jokic is from in Serbia. He visits him in the summers.

He knows Jokic's parents and his two older brothers. And now he knows Jokic's wife and daughter.

"Honestly, it's very fun to be part of his journey," Stojakovic said. "To see how he's maturing from year one to year two, three, four, five, six, seven.

"You know he came as a boy. Now he's a father."

Each step was deliberate and thoughtful. This last one will be the hardest.

"For the first two years, we butted our heads because he had his own pace and he didn't understand how hard he had to work," Stojakovic said. "But now he does. He works so hard. And he's ready to do whatever it takes to win
DURING A REPLAY review with 22.8 seconds remaining in the fourth quarter of Game 1 of the NBA Finals, the path to Tyrese Haliburton's game-winning shot was set.

The Pacers were awaiting the outcome of a challenge from coach Rick Carlisle, who wanted officials to double-check whether Pascal Siakam was fouled or had touched the ball last before falling out of bounds.

It was a pivotal swing with Indiana trailing by one point, and Carlisle wanted to make sure his team was prepared for either outcome. If the review was successful, the Pacers would have possession of the ball. If not, he instructed his crew to play defense and get a stop without fouling. And with about an eight-second difference between the shot and game clock, the message was clear. There would not be another timeout. Get the rebound and go.

"Get the ball in Tyrese's hands," Carlisle said after the game that evening. "And look to make a play."

First, the Pacers got the stop -- easier said than done against the league's reigning Most Valuable Player, Shai Gilgeous-Alexander, but he missed a 15-foot fadeaway with Andrew Nembhard glued to his hip on defense. Aaron Nesmith corralled a tough rebound over Lu Dort before a crowd of players swarmed to the paint. Nesmith quickly shuffled the ball to Siakam, who found Obi Toppin, who swung the ball to Haliburton, giving him possession just before half court with six seconds remaining on the clock.

What followed was one of the most clutch shots in NBA Finals history. Haliburton dribbled and jab-stepped along the Pacers' sideline before curling back inside the arc and rising up to score the game-winning basket, a 21-foot jumper with 0.3 seconds remaining as the Pacers stole Game 1 of the series in Oklahoma City.

It may have seemed easy for Carlisle to trust Haliburton in that moment, especially given the budding Pacers star's propensity for hitting big shots in the biggest moments -- Game 1 was his fourth game-winning or game-tying shot in the final seconds of these playoffs -- but such faith is years in the making.

The freedom the Pacers play with on offense is born out of the relationship between Carlisle and Haliburton, a bond that began the night after Indiana traded for Haliburton in February 2022. But the groundwork also dates back to Carlisle's tenure with the Dallas Mavericks, starting in his first season with the team in 2008-09 when he butted heads with Hall of Fame point guard Jason Kidd and continuing when Carlisle was tasked with the handling of another emerging superstar: Luka Doncic.

"What I learned my first year in Dallas was to give J-Kidd the ball and get out of the way, let him run the show, let him run the team," Carlisle said before the start of the NBA Finals. "Tyrese, very similar situation, but didn't take half a season to figure it out. The situation in Dallas with Luka was the same.

"It's pretty clear, when you have a player of that kind of magnitude, that kind of presence, that kind of knowledge, vision and depth, you got to let them do what they do."

The philosophy has paid off for the Pacers, who took a 2-1 NBA Finals lead over the Oklahoma City Thunder on Wednesday night with a 116-107 victory at Gainbridge Fieldhouse.

Haliburton and Carlisle have been the masterminds behind this Pacers' offense, which is scoring 116.7 points per 100 possessions in the postseason while featuring a fast-paced style and comeback ethos that has fueled an improbable playoff run through the Eastern Conference.

At the center of it all sits a coach who has learned to adapt through the years with a point guard he happily turned over the reins to.

"When he gave me that nod, that was like the ultimate respect," Haliburton said after practice Tuesday. "That was the ultimate trust that I could get from anybody, because he is such a brilliant basketball mind. He's been around such great guards, great players. For him to give me that confidence, I think has really taken my career to another level."
THE EMPOWERING OF Kidd, a development that followed a lot of headbutting between coach and point guard, could be considered a turning point in Carlisle's career.

Carlisle carried a reputation for being controlling when he first arrived in Dallas. He was known to clash with players during the early days of his coaching career in his first go-round with Indiana from 2003 to 2007, when he was coaching Metta Sandiford-Artest, Stephen Jackson and Jamaal Tinsley. Those Pacers won 61 games and went to the Eastern Conference finals in 2003-04, but they also played a meticulous style with Carlisle calling plays on nearly every possession.
When Carlisle arrived in Dallas a few years later, he tried to do the same, even with Kidd, 35 years old with nine All-Star appearances, on the roster. It didn't go over well.

"It wasn't easy for [Carlisle] to let it go," former NBA guard J.J. Barea, who played with the Mavs from 2006 to 2011 and again from 2014 to 2020, told ESPN. "To be more free about it. But he knew for us to win he had to let it go. J-Kidd and him went to battle, but it worked out at the end."

Kidd emphasized how he wanted the offense to be more free-flowing, stressing that a savvy point guard dictating the flow of the game would lead to better rhythm than a coach on the sidelines trying to manufacture it. Carlisle resisted for more than half a season. It wasn't until midway through the 2010-11 season -- his third year coaching Kidd in Dallas -- that Carlisle really gave his point guard the reins. The Mavs won the championship that season.

Carlisle didn't wait nearly as long to give Doncic the keys to the Mavs' offense. That occurred while Doncic was a teenager in the midst of his Rookie of the Year campaign during the 2018-19 season.

The personal relationship between Carlisle and Doncic was often rocky, but the partnership between coach and point guard produced outstanding offensive results. In Doncic's second season, the Mavs set the NBA record at the time for offensive efficiency by averaging 115.9 points per 100 possessions.

Carlisle constructed an offensive system that suited Doncic, one that was drastically different from the one that Kidd operated. Carlisle's Mavs played a heliocentric style with Doncic dominating the ball, emphasizing spacing with stationary spot-up shooting threats as he ran pick-and-roll after pick-and-roll.

The Pacers are succeeding with Haliburton operating a system that is fueled by playing fast and off-ball movement.

"One thing you can say about Rick is he coaches his talent," Haralabos Voulgaris, the Mavs director of quantitative research and development from 2018 to 2021, told ESPN. "His system is whatever maximizes the talent that he has. He understands that the game is changing and he has to always keep on changing and learning and adapting and growing.

"It's not many older coaches that have had that mentality, especially ones that had success when they were younger."

Carlisle's track record with point guards hasn't always been perfect. He clashed with Rajon Rondo a few years after Doncic's rookie season, with Rondo wanting to play more methodically while Carlisle advocated for pushing the pace. The rocky relationship led to Rondo's tenure in Dallas lasting just 46 games.

"It wasn't a good fit for either of them," Barea said.

Carlisle wasn't a fan of the Mavs' trade for Rondo, agreeing to it only because Dirk Nowitzki wanted it, and didn't consider Rondo to be the type of talent that merited offensive control. He had no such reservations about Doncic -- or Haliburton.

"When I see Haliburton playing for Rick, he's free, man," Barea said. "He looks so free out there. He looks like he's enjoying the game. He's playing at a great pace and with confidence. I think Rick got Haliburton's confidence to be as high as it could be."

The friction in Carlisle's relationship with Doncic, a strain that started early in Doncic's rookie season, was a factor in the winningest coach in franchise history eventually resigning from the Mavericks job after the 2020-21 season. Carlisle and Haliburton, on the other hand, have a harmonious bond, one the veteran coach has gone out of his way to foster.

"One of the things that's nice to see is that [Carlisle] has a good relationship with the star players or all the players on his team, it seems like," Voulgaris told ESPN. "Whereas in Dallas, that was probably not the case obviously. There's some growth there."

Yet, the Pacers were meandering and looking for a direction as a franchise by the time Carlisle stepped down in Dallas. They finished 34-38 in 2020-21, the only season under coach Nate Bjorkgren, when they jumped at the chance to hire Carlisle for a second stint as head coach. The team was still searching for an identity, but the veteran coach had an idea of the perfect kind of player to craft an offense around.
HALIBURTON COULD HAVE been a Dallas Maverick.

The Mavericks had Haliburton as the No.1 player on their 2020 draft board, based in large part on Voulgaris' analytics models. Sources told ESPN that the Mavericks dangled their two selections, No. 18 and No. 31, as well as their sometimes starter and sometimes sixth-man guard Jalen Brunson, to every team until Haliburton went off the board at No. 12 to the Sacramento Kings.

"We tried like hell to get him and move up, we just couldn't do it," Carlisle said before the start of the Finals. "When I tell you that Mark Cuban tried everything. When Mark puts his mind to something, he can usually figure something out."
The Mavericks never found a suitor, but Carlisle remained a fan of Haliburton's game from afar through the start of the point guard's career.

The veteran coach got hired in Indiana for the 2021-22 season, but his initial roster lacked the kind of guard Carlisle felt he could rely on and he reverted back to his old instincts.

"Rick's first year here, we had a game where he did that, he stopped us and called a play every single possession," said Pacers center Myles Turner, who has been with Indiana since 2015, the team's longest-tenured player. "In the dawn of this new NBA, especially in the playoffs, that stuff doesn't work."

The Pacers were 19-37 on Feb. 8, 2022 when they had an opportunity to acquire a player who could be their identity. The Sacramento Kings were looking to offload one of their point guards with De'Aaron Fox also on the roster at that point and they made the move to trade Haliburton to the Pacers for a package involving Domantas Sabonis.

After the deal was finalized, Carlisle started out right away trying to establish a strong relationship with his new focal point. He arranged a dinner the night after the trade with Haliburton and the two other players Indiana acquired -- Buddy Hield and Tristan Thompson -- at Prime 47 Steakhouse in Indianapolis, about a block away from Gainbridge Fieldhouse. For the final 26 games of that season and with a young Pacers team far from playoff contention, Carlisle allowed Haliburton to get experience improvising and playing on the fly.

"You saw so many glimpses of the creativity that Tyrese exhibits, the ability to make plays with just very basic structure," Pacers general manager Chad Buchanan told ESPN during a phone interview. "He thrives in situations where there's a little more freedom and a little less predictability."

Going into training camp for the 2022-23 season, Carlisle told Haliburton he didn't want to call plays anymore. Carlisle was handing the offense over to Haliburton, who was 22 years old at the time. He remembered seeing his young point guard's eyes light up.

"I was surprised," Haliburton recalled after practice on Tuesday. "Because I know what the conversation around coach [Carlisle] was, especially from point guards."

HALIBURTON CREDITS CARLISLE for helping his career reach new heights.

It's not only the freedom on offense that helped Haliburton make his first All-Star team the following season, averaging a double-double for the first time in his NBA career in the 2022-23 season with a career-high 20.7 points to go along with 10.4 assists. It was also the work off the court, such as teaching Haliburton how to break down film. Haliburton acknowledged at the start of his career, he would watch film of his own points and assists, maybe a few missed shots. Now he was learning how to watch the whole game, searching for ways to make his teammates better.

"[Carlisle's] just a basketball savant," Haliburton said. "All that stuff is really important. Really took my career to another level."
Haliburton has pointed to those growing pains during the start of his career in Indiana as what helped set him up for success years later performing on the highest levels of the NBA Playoffs. But it was the trust the organization showed in Haliburton that helped his confidence on the court grow even higher.

"They're going to have some ups and downs," Carlisle said. "They're going to make some mistakes. If they're doing it consistent with how they're seeing the game, the lessons learned will be more impactful."

The lessons Carlisle learned early in his career have also paid dividends.

After a rough start early on in his relationship with Doncic, Carlisle made a point to get things off on the right note right away with his new superstar.

"Everybody in our league from players to coaches and executives, we all evolve," Buchanan said. "Rick has evolved just like we all have. He understands that Tyrese is one of those guys. He's got a fun-loving, joyful personality that rubs off on everybody.

"Tyrese is the kind of guy who you can build a culture around."

It worked in Indiana. The Pacers are back in the Finals for the first time in 25 years, following up on an Eastern Conference finals berth last season, one of the most successful two-year runs in team history. And at the heart of it are Carlisle and Haliburton, two basketball minds with a mutual respect for one another, thriving to make playoff magic.

Or as Voulgaris told ESPN: "Rick, at this stage of his career in particular, and Haliburton, just seem to be a perfect marriage."

Terms of UsePrivacy PolicyInterest-Based AdsEU Privacy RightsCookie Policy
Bennedict Mathurin, Pacers top Thunder in NBA Finals Game 3
INDIANAPOLIS -- With a huge boost from their bench and a better game from their stars, the Indiana Pacers reclaimed the lead in the NBA Finals on Wednesday night with a 116-107 victory against the Oklahoma City Thunder in Game 3.

Bennedict Mathurin scored a game-high 27 points off the bench, the most points for a reserve in an NBA Finals game since Jason Terry in 2011, and T.J. McConnell had five steals, leading the way as the Pacers' bench outscored the Thunder's 49-18.

Tyrese Haliburton added 22 points, 11 assists and 9 rebounds while Pascal Siakam scored 21 points as the Pacers took a 2-1 series advantage over the heavily favored Thunder.

"This is the kind of team that we are," Pacers coach Rick Carlisle said. "We need everybody to be ready. It's not always going to be exactly the same guys that are stepping up with scoring and stuff like that, but this is how we got to do it. We got to do it as a team."

The Pacers now find themselves in control of the series. Teams that win Game 3 of a 1-1 NBA Finals have gone on to win 80.5% of the time, and Indiana remains unbeaten after a loss in the 2025 postseason, improving to 5-0. The Pacers have not dropped back-to-back games since March 8 and 10.
Game 4 is in Indianapolis on Friday night.

Mathurin was the catalyst Wednesday. He became the sixth player since the NBA/ABA merger in 1976-77 to score 25 or more points in the Finals at age 22 or younger, joining Kawhi Leonard, LeBron James, Tony Parker, Kobe Bryant and Magic Johnson.

"He did a great job of coming off handoffs, reading the pocket, rising up from the midrange," Haliburton said. "This is a defense that will give that up."

And the Pacers got a huge spark from McConnell, who scored 10 points with five assists to go along with the five steals, numbers no player has ever put up in an NBA Finals game.

"That's the great thing about the Finals, great thing about basketball," Haliburton said. "When you have a team with this much depth, it can be anybody's night."

Mathurin had not played a huge role in the first two games of the series -- playing 16 minutes in Game 1 and 22 in Game 2 with a stint in garbage time -- so he put in extra work over the weekend to help prepare for this game.

"Just staying ready," Mathurin said Wednesday night. "Whenever my number is called, go into the game and do the right things and try to help my team win. That's the whole mindset."

It's a mindset the Pacers have seen from Mathurin ever since he was the No. 6 pick of the 2022 draft, but especially as Mathurin was sidelined in March 2024 with a torn labrum in his right shoulder.

The injury prevented him from playing during the Pacers' run to the Eastern Conference finals last year, and Haliburton said they have talked all season about how crucial it would be to have Mathurin in the rotation this time.

"As much as I was out last year, not being able to play, I learned a lot," Mathurin said. "Just being on the bench and being next to the coaches who were able to run me through the game and stuff like that. It was an unfortunate situation, but I was fortunate enough to learn a lot and be ready for this year."

After the injury, Carlisle said Mathurin placed a calendar in the team's training room with a countdown to when he would finally be cleared to play.

"Every day he would come in and take one off, take one off," Carlisle said. "He was counting the days down to being cleared sometime in August. Then be able to begin training camp, begin 5-on-5 with our guys in September and then be in training camp, really, with his eyes firmly set on an opportunity in the playoffs.

"He's putting a lot of work to be ready for these moments, and tonight he was an absolute major factor."

Thunder point to 'unforced errors' in Game 3 loss to Pacers
INDIANAPOLIS -- Jalen Williams swished a tough pull-up 3-pointer at the third-quarter buzzer to give the Oklahoma City Thunder a five-point lead. Not much went right for them after that.

"We just had a lot of unforced errors," Williams said after Oklahoma City's 116-107 loss to the Indiana Pacers in Wednesday's pivotal Game 3 of the NBA Finals. "They capitalized on them because they're a good team."

The Thunder were outscored 32-18 in the fourth quarter. It was the second time this postseason that Indiana outscored Oklahoma City by a double-digit margin in the final frame. That is the difference in the series, as the Pacers, who are up 2-1, rallied from behind in the fourth quarter in both of their wins.

"In the fourth quarter, I just thought they really outplayed us on both ends," Thunder coach Mark Daigneault said. "I thought they were in character in terms of their physicality, their pressure on defense. Then they were in character in terms of their pace on offense."

The Pacers improved to 9-1 in clutch games this season, the most clutch wins in a single postseason since the Miami Heat went 11-3 in such games in 2020, according to ESPN Research.
This is a familiar predicament for the Thunder, who fought back from a 2-1 deficit against the Denver Nuggets in the Western Conference semifinals, eventually winning in seven games.

"We have a great opportunity here," said Oklahoma City center/power forward Chet Holmgren, who scored 20 points but struggled in the fourth quarter, when he was 1-of-5 from the floor and had his shot blocked by Pacers big man Myles Turner three times. "The great thing is we have another game coming up, Game 4. We can't be thinking about frustration or anything. No matter how good it's going, how bad it's going, the focus can't be on your emotions. It has to be on what we're trying to accomplish, the task at hand."

Oklahoma City, often playing against full-court pressure after allowing the Pacers to score, missed nine of its final 10 shots from the floor. That ugly stretch started after a Williams floater pulled the Thunder within a point of the Pacers with 5:58 remaining.

The Thunder's only bucket down the stretch was a midrange pull-up by Shai Gilgeous-Alexander, but that was the MVP's only field goal in the fourth quarter. He was held to three points on 1-of-3 shooting with no assists in the final frame.

"They were aggressive," Gilgeous-Alexander said of the Pacers' defense. "They were heavy in the crowd. I'm not sure how many points they had, but it felt like when they scored, we're going against a set defense, and it's always harder against a set defense."

Gilgeous-Alexander finished with 24 points on 9-of-20 shooting, his lowest-scoring performance since a lopsided Game 3 loss to the Minnesota Timberwolves in the West finals. He had four assists and six turnovers, the first time this postseason that he had a negative assist-to-turnover ratio.

"It goes back to a little bit more force," Gilgeous-Alexander said. "If we're more aggressive in the pick-and-roll and setting it up, then we get a better angle. Things like that usually comes down to who throws the first punch."

The Thunder's two losses in the Finals have come down to the Pacers landing a flurry of punches at the end.

"To win games of this magnitude, at this level, we have to be better," Holmgren said. "We need to close games, close quarters, close possessions. It doesn't just come down to the end of the game. We got to figure out how to put ourselves in a better position for the whole 48 minutes."

Game 4 is Friday in Indianapolis (8:30 p.m. ET, ABC).

How a ticket from Michael Jordan's Chicago Bulls debut became priceless
THE TICKET was in one of his pockets and stayed there during the game. He discovered it later that evening when he rode the train back from the city and returned to his freshman dorm room, as he set his personal items on the desk before bed. Mike Cole would've taken the ticket and either opened the tiny desk drawer at the side of the room by the window and stored it inside, or placed it on one of the shelves in his closet above a pile of dirty laundry and his low-top Nike basketball shoes.

Thirty-seven years later, in the winter of 2021, Cole was watching a newscast one evening when a headline flashed on the screen. He immediately stumbled into the basement of his Connecticut home and turned the lights on. He almost slipped going down the stairs and made his way to the auxiliary closet and the plastic bin with "MIKE'S MEMORY BOX" written in Sharpie on recycled duct tape on the side. The manila folder was still in there, and the ticket, too, with all the other tickets, where it had landed for years after following him around for most of his adult life.

It had a reminder on the back about the box office hours of Chicago Stadium in 1984, noon to 6 p.m. except Sundays, and a block paragraph of microscopic typeface that the service charge was nonrefundable and neither the Bulls nor their players were liable for fans getting injured during the game. On the front, a watermark of the stadium as its centerpiece; the Bulls' mascot on the left edge of the perforation; a handsome red border that set the dull background promoting the event -- Chicago Bulls vs. Washington Bullets, Oct. 26, 7:30 p.m -- in relief. Those design flairs added to its singular value but weren't the actual explanation of why it turned out to be the most valuable ticket from a sporting event in history.

The game was the professional debut of a rookie guard from the University of North Carolina, who in a middle-aged man's recollections had done nothing that night to portend his legend.

The ticket allowed Cole only a single memory: No. 23, in his white jersey, on his back on the court, the crowd around him rising in whispered concern. Cole, then 18 years old, had stood, too; if he strained, he could still picture the young player in the air with his tongue out, long before it was emulated by the world. On that very first NBA dunk attempt, Michael Jordan fell on his back and almost ended his professional career the night it began.

Cole's attendance became an erstwhile conversation piece as he aged and his recollections about the whole thing faded -- he'd long ago put the ticket away in the manila envelope in the plastic container. As the Bulls made playoff runs in the late '80s, and Jordan finally got past the Detroit Pistons in the early '90s, Cole found opportunities here or there to brag about being at MJ's very first game. But even after the sixth championship, it was merely another relic from some sporting event Cole had saved, along with about two dozen hockey, baseball and football tickets and a Cindy Crawford signed calendar from 1990, framed pictures of his mom and dad, purple pompoms from the Rose Bowl -- the ticket never seemed special beyond its personal value.

That it ever had any real value before last year was a different kind of conversation altogether, one about his father, old games and the reasons people hold on to anything at all. His dad was a D.C. lawyer; pretty much the only time they hung out was when they attended events together. Cole left home to attend Northwestern, and as a surprise, his dad had called a friend in the Bullets' front office and had him leave Mike two tickets at will call to Jordan's first game. All these years later, Cole hated the idea of letting any of his tickets go, of giving them to someone else who couldn't understand and hadn't actually been there.

"Every ticket can tell you a story," Cole says. "I'm someone who's about relationships and experiences. And that's what tickets are to me."

But then, that winter night in 2021, he saw the news story on TV: Ticket stub from Michael Jordan's NBA debut sells for $264K. Cole's ticket in the basement wasn't a mere stub; it was unused, untorn, a complete ticket in good condition. A few weeks later, an armored truck came around the stop sign at the end of the street outside of his house, his neighbors and friends watching in stupefaction, his wife, Kristen, bundled against the cold so she could take a commemorative picture of Mike letting the ticket go to auction. Still, even as appraisers and investors hyperventilated at his discovery, the first ticket of any kind likely worth a million bucks; even as Cole was promised the moon from auction houses seeking his business and hyping its value; even as he stretched his arm to give the ticket to a man wearing a bulletproof vest and a Glock on his waistband bound for Heritage Auctions in Dallas, he wasn't totally convinced parting with it was the right thing to do.

On a shivery evening last Feb. 26, the final night of the ticket's auction, Mike and Kristen hosted a party at their house in Cheshire, Connecticut. His neighbors toasted him while gathered in the kitchen. Cheers to randomly keeping it! Cheers to some NBA game four decades back, and Mike's luck of being there. Cheers to the greatest basketball player of all time! The recent snow was still shiny in Cole's driveway, the empty starlight in the frozen sky. The Cole family laptop screen streamed the live feed from the Heritage Winter Sports Collectibles Auction on the large TV. The two dogs curled up, ambivalent to the noise in the living room. Cole blushed, as 10 p.m. turned to 11 p.m. and the ticket's value surpassed $300,000. The neighbors chanted, "TO THE MILLION-DOLLAR TICKET!" and "Go, go, GO!" as Cole brought a mini bottle of Fireball Cinnamon Whisky up to his lips each time the only known complete ticket from Michael Jordan's first NBA game went up in value by increments of $10,000.
THE TICKET made him famous with his neighbors. They already liked Mike Cole anyway for his odd place in the equilibrium of the cul-de-sac, the tall, bald guy who waited too long to shovel his driveway when it snowed and then slipped on the ice while coming back from retrieving the mail. An admissions director of the medical school at Quinnipiac University who once purchased two Justin Bieber singing toothbrushes, telling his wife and kids that he'd open one and save the other because he had a hunch it would someday be valuable. That had yet to be true, the tinny rendition of "Baby" playing through the mechanical plastic speaker every time Mike raised his arm to clean his teeth.

Nine hours before the auction party, he was inside Sliders Grill & Bar with his knees uncomfortably pushed into the bottom of a high table, holding his reading glasses over the various flavors of wings on the menu. A 55-year-old distracted by the impending sale of the ticket and what he and his family could do with the money. Kristen, a software analyst and IT specialist, admitted, "I don't need any more stuff. But the washing machine looks a little old ..." Mike's 15-year-old Kia Sorento had broken down beyond what it was worth to repair. He chuckled at what seemed like ideations of grandeur for a financially stable family that never liked to splurge, even on something like $10 bowls of his favorite mac and cheese from Panera Bread.

"I told my neighbors, 'I need this money to replace our underwear,'" he joked. He did allow himself something that was totally unlike him: Googling the price of a Lamborghini, which he considered to be the ultimate rich person's car. What would he even do with it, he wondered -- he was wearing a lululemon hoodie he bought at a discount online, and a Purdue cap (his daughter was a freshman there), and he complained about being so tall as to always be uncomfortable in any kind of car, a titanium replacement in his right knee. Lambos started around $230,000 and shot up from there.

Mike unconsciously checked the Heritage app every few minutes on his phone. The ticket had been out of his possession for 23 days by then and in the air-controlled confines of an auction-house vault, promoted by Heritage online and in a 646-page Winter Sports Collectibles catalogue with holographic cover: "1984 Michael Jordan NBA Debut Chicago Bulls Full Ticket, PSA Authentic -- The Only Known Example!" A three-page foldout showed a close-up of the front and back of the ticket, fastened into its translucent case, highlighting the creased left flap that hadn't been torn away. All the other known tickets from the game, around 30 total, were stubs with that same left edge in various states of having been torn.

Seventeen people had put in a bid by the afternoon of the 26th. Mike both wondered aloud why anyone would care about that ancient season-opener against the Bullets and dreamed of American billionaires or people of unimaginable wealth from overseas being some of the interested parties. "Is it Bezos? Is it Gates?" he asked. Were they big Jordan fans? (Wasn't everyone?) And "How closely are they tracking this ticket?" The price was already at $260,000, and he was aware bidding could ramp near the end of the auction.

He was probably but one of a thousand sports fans at random bars across the country at that moment zoned in to some kind of nostalgia about the greatness of No. 23 -- but from his stool, he offered no memories of any of Jordan's clutch shots or famous games, no sentimentality about following the man's career or what it had meant to him (though he did once live in Chicago and was there for the first two titles). An entire generation of NBA fans had never seen Jordan play, which hurt to think about at the bar. Besides recent footage from "The Last Dance," trying to put that kind of career into context for people who couldn't understand -- like his son and daughter, who thought him having the ticket was weird and funny -- was impossible. Out of all the people anywhere who might be talking about Michael Jordan at that moment, he reasonably assumed he was the only one for whom fate was about to intervene. Michael Jordan was about to, in Mike Cole's words, "enhance our quality of life."
MIKE COLE STOOD one inch taller than Michael Jordan but always claimed the same height. He had been 6-foot-7 for his adult life, and it seemed to delight people when he provided that piece of trivia when strangers inquired how tall he really was: as tall as Michael Jordan. He became aware not too many years after attending that game in 1984 that everyone could understand such a reference point, staring up at him. He took in the world from the same vantage point, though he was pale white, with a paunch, and high cholesterol, and a bad knee, and he wore glasses and loathed to have his picture taken.

His experience with actual basketball amounted to a few years in high school in Bethesda, Maryland, when in his junior year, he grew from 5-10 to 6-5 and had trouble figuring out how to transition from being a shooting guard to a center. He was still coerced onto the team, stuck in the middle of the paint by the coach and instructed to just stand there and be taller than anyone else. The other kids nicknamed him "Franchise," no matter his dearth of skill.

He'd found life at that height a daily hindrance ever since, especially in his mid-50s: the elongated body, the misfortune to never blend in, the most noticeable thing about him being the most tiresome, what people joked about and fixated upon in every room he stepped into. He sometimes wondered if Jordan's experience had been the same, especially now he was conducting his life as an executive, at nearly the same age -- like if he had trouble contorting himself into one of the smaller sports cars that he surely owned, or if he also stood next to the marble island in some mansion and got frustrated with the tiny space between the counter and sink.

To be the same height; to also be named Michael; to prefer the shortened Mike; to live near and in Chicago in his late teens and early 20s; to share the ignominy of his hair receding early -- well, Mike Cole was, as he remarked using the words from the famous Gatorade commercial, kind of "like Mike." Still, while he'd never totally forgotten he possessed the ticket to that first game, it wasn't something he thought about much either -- until the overnight demand for his own bit of history was forcing him to have it pried away.

Before he left Sliders to go home and prepare for the neighbors, he placed the manila folder on the table, taking care to avoid getting it greasy with wing sauce. The Jordan ticket wasn't there anymore, of course, and he let the other tickets fall onto the table to show that he didn't save every one and that none of the tickets he kept would be easy to get rid of. A couple of large Final Four tickets, a Wrestlemania II ticket, a World Series ticket. An Orange Bowl ticket his father purchased for OU vs. Washington when the Sooners got penalized after the covered wagon came onto the field and got stuck in the grass. The Rose Bowl ticket when Northwestern lost to USC (the purple pompom from the game back in the memory box). One of the greatest hockey games of all time, the championship of the 2009 Frozen Four that Boston U won in OT not long before his dad had a stroke. In most cases, he never looked at the tickets he'd saved again.
THE NIGHT of Michael Jordan's first regular-season game as a Bull, Chicago Stadium was nearly 60 years old. At that point in its history, before it became the hardest ticket to buy in sports, the place was famous not only for bad basketball but for all of its eccentricities, like the cats that lived there and hunted mice in secret beyond the stands, and the peanut smell of old smoke, and the staircase inside of the walls that literally led to nowhere.

Mike Cole surely would've been one of the 13,900 fans arriving from the streetside, stopping in front of the will-call window through the entrance on the edge of Madison, reaching his hand into the space in front of the teller to retrieve the two tickets. Then going into Gate 5 of the stadium, where an usher ripped one of the tickets into a stub, he had no idea what he would've done except drop it to the ground. He would've taken his place in the second level in the fourth seat from the aisle, among the crowd -- nearly 4,000 short of a sellout -- in Section P, Seat 4, light jacket folded into the seat next to him, Seat 3.

Cole can't remember the standing ovation that lasted 13 seconds as Jordan rose from the bench in team regalia, white jersey with red piping. Jordan almost jumped out of his seat on the bench, the last player to rise and join the others, sidestepping a cheerleader who'd blocked his path onto the court, pumping his fist four times, his older teammates forming a circle around him. From the stands, Cole rustled around to get comfortable in the red wooden seat, rising when Jordan got the very first opening tip of his career and then sitting in disappointment as he came down the court and missed his first shot (rebounded off the back of the iron by Steve Johnson and tipped in).

In comparison to Chicago's Bears and Cubs, the Bulls were awful, but Cole was a Bullets fan there to see Gus Williams and Jeff "McFilthy" Ruland. It sounded ridiculous to admit years later that he couldn't even find anyone from his dorm to go with him -- "It was a Friday night, one month into my freshman year. I have one extra ticket, I live in a hallway with 20 guys, and I'm going to pick one?" Mike said -- and that he'd gone to root for the visiting team.

Jordan missed 11 out of the 16 shots he attempted and was admonished in the lede of Bob Sakamoto's story in the Chicago Tribune the next day, even after scoring 16 points: "We'll forgive you this time, Michael Jordan." Cole was not too far from where Jordan exited the bench to begin his career. He saw Jordan fall, knocked to the ground by McFilthy, and then everyone stood, and then No. 23 got up and walked it off. That was before forces beyond the culture turned Michael Jordan into Michael Jordan, who turned the arena and the city into his own dominion for the next two decades, the dominion of the air.
COLE COULD ONLY wonder what his father would say. About the enticement of a windfall and the publicity of the basement discovery taking precedence over something they'd shared together -- him buying the ticket as a gift and imparting such an opportunity on his son. His father, well, Mike could see his old man, shoulder to shoulder, eye to eye after they marveled at a great play, a few rows from the ice in the Beanpot classic, then close enough to smell the action at the Final Four; the dinners, the jerseys, the plane rides together to some faraway game, their family meals held hostage by the jabber of correcting each other's memories about stats or pivotal points in the action,the ice arenas where they could hear every word they said to each other above the sound of skates on the rink. Maybe letting that ticket go for big money would have been an easy call for most people, but in a part of Mike's mind, it was like placing a price upon his dad.

The ticket demanded a story alongside the experience it had provided, some kind of introspection. It had allowed Mike Cole to be there, after all, at the very beginning, so long before the apotheosis, with Jordan coming onto the court in warmups and dribbling near the center of the floor, almost like he was anyone else.

What was it like, the neighbors were asking him the night of the auction, what were people saying back then about Michael Jordan at 21 years old? Cole struggled to come up with something interesting to say, and the neighbors were disappointed that there weren't a thousand details within reach. And left to wonder, if no one could remember hardly anything about it then, why that game had become so valuable at all. Like the Jordan sneakers, they saw a pair in the same auction as Cole's, game-worn and cracked at the soles, selling for $105,000. That made sense. So, too, his jersey from Game 1 of the 1998 NBA Finals in Utah going for $10.1 million at Sotheby's. The iterations of his basketball cards, in mint condition, worth six figures. But his debut game in 1984 had, until recently, escaped any real part of his mythology, except for a single paragraph of David Halberstam's Playing for Keeps: "[Jeff] Ruland knocked Jordan down hard after a drive, and he hit the floor with a sharp crack."

A company called Globe Ticket, in 1984, printed the tickets, a physical copy for every seat in the house for every game. There were five versions, and Mike Cole ended up with what became the most sought-after, inarguably the prettiest-looking, version the Bulls printed for season-ticket holders with the red border and the Bulls logo and the Chicago Stadium imprint on the front. The other versions were less visually appealing, certainly, the box office versions that were plain blue and flat white with no logo, strange color choices when it came to the Bulls. The fourth ticket type was sold at Ticketron Sears and Carson's store outlets with nothing discernable in the rainbow coloring that had any connection to the team at all. And a fifth version that had been discovered, mistakenly printed with the Chicago Blackhawks' logo.

"A lot of things happened in the last three years that altered the course of the importance in value of these tickets," says Simeon Lipman, a sports memorabilia appraiser for Antiques Roadshow for the last 25 years. "The first thing, the pandemic. The second thing, the demise of Kobe. His death started this nostalgia. The third thing, unbelievably important, was the documentary, 'The Last Dance.' You had all these people who are very nostalgic for a moment in time -- the '80s, '90s, early 2000s, all these kids who are now in their 30s and 40s. The tickets are some of the rarest pieces of ephemera that you can put at the event. What people started to realize, Jordan's debut is top of the mountain as far as tickets are concerned, this unbelievably important piece of ephemera, there's barely any of it out there. People have the basketball card, the Jordan 1s, but not a ticket to his debut game. ... Tickets in general are becoming extinct. People don't have paper tickets anymore. They have it on their phone."

MIKE COLE, alone, had watched "The Last Dance," all 10 parts of it, downstairs in Connecticut. He loved it, an aging man on his own couch taking a bittersweet trip down memory lane. But it wasn't exactly easy viewing for someone who grew up with Jordan as the greatest athlete of all time, the camera lighting that revealed the strange cruelties of the particular way he'd aged. That his face had swollen and his eyes had yellowed almost like they were jaundiced by what all it took to win. That he hadn't appeared to ease into the congeniality of hearing other people recall his life from an older perspective. He still seemed under a kind of duress. All the grudges, maybe, still festering somewhere within. The spiteful laugh as he watched the interviews with former players, lesser men all of them, conquered at his hand years ago. MJ chuckling and fiddling with a cigar. How empty it must've been for him when he played -- the solitude, the giant headphones, everyone an enemy. The never-settled scores, the imaginings he used to motivate himself, the soul-ravening appetite to win a game. The world bursting into the lobby of all those hotels on the road, his couch as prison cell, the alcohol and gambling as soporifics, the sunglasses as simulacrum of personal space.

Cole had watched the documentary in the same living room where he and his neighbors were now gathered as the auction crossed into 11 p.m., and then midnight. Cole bug-eyed, beyond exhaustion into an anxious delirium, the ticket on the screen reflecting in the lenses of his frameless glasses. "This is the first time you can ever buy this!" he said to no one in particular. "This is the only one in existence. That's the importance! The shoes, the jerseys ... this has a different cachet."

The neighbors ribbed Kristen into admitting marrying Mike had finally paid off. "Did you foresee this investment?" "Was all that time, and years with him, worth it now?"

"If it gets to a million, Mike has to drink the whole bottle!"

"We're all going to Michael Jordan's restaurant for dinner!"

"You need to send an email to Michael Jordan in some way, and say, 'Hey, I have your ticket,' Identify if you're the seller, and, hey, if Jordan responds ..."

Eventually, as the auction lagged, the neighbors left, the room quieted and Mike and Kristen toasted each other. It was 1 a.m.

"In another 50 years, we're going to have ... an unopened Justin Bieber electric toothbrush to sell!" Mike said.

FOR A COUPLE HOURS after their neighbors went home, Kristen sat on the couch with her husband, imagining a young, dorky Mike Cole in his dorm room making a then-meaningless decision to stash the ticket. The dogs were asleep, the Fireball bottles empty, the cul-de-sac black in the nighttime except for little halos of the streetlights. Finally, they went to bed; the auction, still going, seemed like it would probably keep going forever.

Mike overslept that morning and kept hitting snooze on his phone. Kristen had been up earlier and was so tempted to look, but she waited so that her husband could be first. Finally, he woke up, and when he opened the Heritage app, he discovered the ticket had sold at 3 a.m. for $468,000, becoming one of the highest prices paid for a ticket from a sporting event.

"The happiness is incredible, but I definitely have the feeling of, I can now get back to my life," Mike said at breakfast, over pancakes, which meant trying to figure out the best way to get the kids through college and save money for early retirement. "The beauty of this, for me, is it'll allow us to chip away."

The money arrived as a lump sum in the mail in a FedEx package from Heritage on March 20, in the form of a single check. When Mike took it to his local Wells Fargo to deposit it in person, almost $430,000, he handed it to the teller and felt that he should explain: "Are you interested to know why I'm able to pay off my mortgage today?" he asked.

"OK ..." the teller said.

"Are you a basketball fan?" he asked. "I imagine you've heard of Michael Jordan ..."

A few months after the auction, he really started to wonder if he made the wrong decision, almost to the point of paranoia. This became a type of torture, the second-guessing, the looking at other stubs at auction that had surfaced since his ticket sold and checking the prices of each -- he'd made some kind of mistake, and now there was no way to go back and recoup something priceless. "I'm a panicker," he admitted. "Should I have waited?" There was again the knowledge of his father calling to purchase the tickets as a surprise, to expand his worldview, as a way to get him out of the dorm and into the big city freshman year.

Was it priceless, though? He would obsess about this question at Quinnipiac, where he'd gone back to work Monday after the sale and become just another coworker again; a couple of people who saw the news told him congratulations, that's exciting, in passing. Or when they took friends out to dinner and Mike picked up the bill with an expanded bank account, which he tried to assure anyone who was close to them would not become a habit. "My generosity cannot continue," he laughed. "They've known that's not my character."

"I feel good," Mike said in May. "The sale of the ticket is yesterday's news to most, which is fine by me."

"You know, being 55, I don't have the time anymore to worry about this," he said. "It's just a piece of paper."

THE TICKET's importance wasn't lost on the two brothers who went in together to purchase it from Heritage Auctions, both in their 30s and residing in Miami. Cole's assumption was that whoever bought it would be looking to expand his or her portfolio, to make an investment, plain and simple. That it wouldn't be a real Jordan fan, at all, which was a thought that verged, for him, on disgust. But though the buyer(s) had listed the ticket immediately for sale after purchase (for nearly $700,000), and were businessmen of some capacity and means, he was wrong, partly. One of the brothers wrote to ESPN through an intermediary that he'd "gotten into" tickets as a collectors' item. But this particular one, Cole's ticket, the attractiveness of it, the red in the Bulls logo, the Chicago Stadium imprint in the middle, that it was completely intact, he was obsessed about "what it meant," even though "nothing special necessarily happened" during the course of that game.

The buyer mentioned "nostalgia" for that era of the NBA, for the players, the uniforms, the shoes, the commercials, for Mars Blackmon and Spike Lee. For a youth spent learning the game through Jordan. "This ticket is the Michael Jordan collectible of the ticket world!" he wrote. The buyer wanted it known that as a kid he had come to understand basketball through MJ, and, like everyone else, wanted to be "like Mike." As the neighbors in Mike Cole's house laughed and drank and then went back to their own homes, the buyer bidding on the ticket found the experience "nerve-wracking," and was awake near dawn on the Eastern seaboard, raising his price every 30 minutes each time he was outbid.

The buyer admitted, "I would've spent a million dollars to own it, if that's what it took."
WHEN JORDAN WAS YOUNG, he had a townhouse in Northbrook, Illinois, in 1984, when the team was training at Angel Guardian Gym, a former orphanage where the Bulls practiced. In his youth, he was circumspect and loyal and played golf without betting thousands on a round. His mother did his laundry and folded his clothes.

On the day of his first NBA game, he would've taken the Edens Expressway to the Kennedy, and pulled off at Ogden Avenue downtown near Chicago Stadium, where in the years to come, a group of young kids stuck around all day just to watch him drive by. Even when he was the most famous person in the world, he would still stop to talk to them before games and leave them tickets. He had a deal with Chicagoland Chevrolet in those early years, and he also owned a Corvette. It scared the team because he drove too fast.

The Magic of Summer Basketball
I AM SOMEONE WHO GREW UP in a city without an NBA team. A city with a rich basketball history propelled by local legends. People who starred in high school, and maybe played for a college team that you could watch on ESPN from time to time. Guys who came home in the summer and played in summer leagues and tournaments that captivated young, aspiring players who hoped to one day do the same.

In July and August this year, I went to Seattle for Jamal Crawford's CrawsOver Pro-Am, to the Drew League in Los Angeles, and to the Kingdom Summer League in my hometown of Columbus, Ohio. I went to witness the magic that takes place on long days in hot gyms, to be in the company of that hope, and to return to a place that felt childlike, almost.

Columbus, Ohio -- July
AT THE START OF THE 2016 DOCUMENTARY "Who is Estaban," there is a moment when Columbus basketball legend Estaban Weaver offers up a rapturous monologue on what propels his love of the game, down to the most granular details. The way you can hear the echo of shoes squeaking, ricocheting off the walls, or rattling the metal of some lockers in a hallway, well before you even walk through a gym's doors. And it's the smell, too. The smell of a gym. Sweat, but not only sweat. There are other faint undertones: sometimes rubber, sometimes stale butter, heaving a thick cloud from the opening of a largely neglected popcorn machine. It sounds weird, Weaver says in the film. But I'd bottle that smell. I'd use it as cologne.

Ohio Dominican University is the site of the Kingdom Summer league, kicking off its eighth year, helmed by Tihon Johnson, 40, who started his high school career at Centennial High before transferring to East High, just down the street from Ohio Dominican. He was all-state, went on to play at Idaho, and then overseas. He started the Kingdom Summer League in 2014, running games out of a local rec center, and then East High's gym, and then, when it grew, Ohio Dominican.

In the middle of the summer, the campus is sleepy, and the gym is tucked just beyond the main road. You wouldn't be aware that anything would be unfolding anywhere, but for the chorus of shouts and squeaking shoes that, even from the outside, act as a kind of map for those who know the game and love the game and don't get to see it up close that often.

Columbus is not without its own pro (or...at least semi-pro) basketball history, even just in my lifetime. From 1989 to 1994, the city had the Columbus Horizon, a team that played in the CBA. From 1996-1998, we had the Columbus Quest, who played in the pre-WNBA American Basketball League. The Quest won both championships in the league's small history, and you could get into games at the convention center for pretty much no money, which people did sometimes, if for no other reason than to watch Ohio legend Katie Smith.

But it's impossible to detach Columbus, Ohio's basketball history from its high school legends. City league ball, specifically. If you were from the city, and you played in the city league, you had a legacy to uphold. It also didn't always matter if you made it "out," whatever that may mean. Playing in the coliseum, at the fairgrounds in the state tournament, sometimes that was the biggest moment. That was making it. Of course, there are better stories. Our guy Drew Lavender was on the cover of Sports Illustrated once. If you are around the right crowd on the Eastside of the city, you will still hear stories about East High School's 1951 state championship, the 1963 championship, the 1968 and 1969, back-to-back, and the 1979 title. On my block, there's a man who swore he saw all of them, and I believe him, even though he doesn't look old enough to have lived through it all.

Because the Columbus basketball economy is so reliant on local legends, there is a specific flair to what can happen here in the summer, and it has always been that way. When I was growing up, it was the Worthington Summer League, or it was the infamous Gus Macker three-on-three tournament, which spilled from Franklin Park out into Broad Street. Or it was simply the courts of your own neighborhood, where, depending on the time and place you grew up, the city's best players would converge, guys who fought through their first or second years of college coming back home to get tested the way they never could in a college gym, playing against the players who have known them and their game for years.

The Kingdom Summer League is at the intersection of all of those impulses. It is fiercely competitive, but also celebratory. It is a homecoming, of sorts, even for the players who live here. The court is home. It transcends the places you live, or have lived. If you were made in this city, you can come back and play in this city, and there will be people who remember you when you first made a name for yourself. In a city like Columbus, if you were great once on these courts, you can always exist in a space beyond fading memories.
Los Angeles -- July
THE KING DREW MAGNET HIGH SCHOOL GYM welcomes another King, as LeBron James makes his way through the corridors, a black and white pinstripe jersey tucked into matching shorts. The last time he was here was in 2011, a pivotal year for the Drew, which by that point, was struggling to keep people engaged and coming through at a consistently high level. But, in the summer of 2011, with the NBA in the middle of a lockout, its stars were looking for anywhere to compete, and the Drew provided space and opportunity. Kevin Durant and Kobe Bryant made their first appearances in the pro-am that summer, playing with peers like James Harden and DeMar DeRozan (infamously, Bryant hit a game-winner over Harden in the dying moments of a heated contest, giving his team a two-point win.)

Also making his Drew debut that summer was James, who scored 33 points and offered up a series of highlight dunks. Today, 11 years later, James still has the occasional highlight dunk in his bag, catching an alley-oop off the backboard and swinging on the rim before descending and staring skyward, for a moment, gathering on the break and pulling off a spin move that isn't as quick as it once was, but is still just as effective, before finishing with a one-handed dunk. One thing about my experience watching LeBron James play basketball -- which I have done since he was in high school -- is that it is often hard to tell how challenging the work on the court is for him. Even when he is challenged to a high degree, he can make the impossible look effortless. But at the Drew, there are points where it does seem like he's taking it easier than he might have in his younger days, and no one is going to fault him for that. The payoff for him launching one too many long jump shots is a spectacular fadeaway or breathtaking pass. It all works out.

He's guarded by Black Pearl Elite's Dion Wright who, truly, tries his best, attempting to corral James with both arms as he makes his way in for an easy layup. Wright is up for the challenge, fighting during post-ups and getting a hand in LeBron's face with every jumper attempt. Wright is also doing enough work on the offensive end to keep his team in it, the less glamorous work, the kind that won't make the highlight clips. Putbacks off of offensive rebounds, getting into space and firing mid-range jumpers. By the end, the game is close, which is surprising given that LeBron is also running today with Drew staple DeMar DeRozan. But Black Pearl Elite makes the game a fight, content to not just find themselves sacrificed at the altar of Drew League Mythology.

In the end, LeBron had 42 points, and his team battled out a two-point win. And that mattered, of course. The winning mattered, or at least it mattered when considering the narrative had he not won. But on the floor, in the building, even as he was shuttled off of the court by a halo of security guards, what mattered most was that, for a little while, he was there, close enough to touch for people who maybe could never see a Lakers game this close. Another miracle of the pro-am is how it undresses the eternally flawed concept of gods, and brings even the greatest among us a little closer to earth.
Seattle -- August
EVERYONE IS EAGER TO TELL ME how the city is not equipped for the heatwave it is currently immersed in. I figure this is because I look both sweaty and shocked when walking into buildings, assuming there would be the waiting respite of air conditioning blowing in from some corner or another, but there isn't. Seattle is one of America's least air-conditioned cities, a statistic I'm hearing for the third time in an hour, as I make my way through the crowd at Seattle Pacific University in the late afternoon on a Saturday. By the time I arrive at the gym, the highlighted game of the day is already in full swing. Chet Holmgren and Paolo Banchero are on one team together, playing against a team headlined by Jaden McDaniels. Banchero and McDaniels are both Seattle guys, on the younger end of an expansive lineage of local talent. The game on the floor is a spectacle, before even touching on the accompanying atmospheric qualities: Holmgren is a defensive terror, blocking anything even remotely close to the basket. Banchero and McDaniels go on individual tears, trading long threes. There's jawing, of course, but it's of the mostly harmless, playful sort. As much as the game itself is compelling, there are people in the stands who occasionally draw attention away from the court. Clippers owner Steve Ballmer is in the building, casually munching away on popcorn and leaning closer to the floor whenever Holmgren or Banchero get the ball at the top of the key. At some point, Jalen Rose sort of quietly slips in through the back door of the gym, but his presence isn't quiet for long, as Jamal Crawford bounds over to him and the two share an embrace while the arena announcer draws the crowd's attention to the two ex-Michigan players, having a moment in a world all their own.

Early in the fourth quarter, Holmgren clears yet another block, but the ball finds itself in the hands of an opposing player, and Banchero finds himself half-paying attention under the rim, resulting in him being on the receiving end of a thunderous dunk, which sends the already eager crowd into an outright frenzy, people in the front row dancing along the baselines and pouring onto the edges of the court while refs frantically blow their whistles to no avail, smiling at their failure to corral overeager young fans. This moment, specifically, animates what can be special about the Pro-Am in this form. A gym that buzzes for minutes at a time, riding the wave of a tense artery of excitement, pushed to its limits until something ignites it, and then it opens. And there is a moment before that opening and a moment beyond it. In the moment beyond, nothing is the same, even if there are still minutes on the clock, even if the explosion of excitement happens in the first quarter.

There is also no real barrier between the court and the people packed into the bleachers or standing along the baseline. There isn't an abundance of security present at the gym either, and so everything relies on people's ability to respect the game and respect the players, which they do. Most of the people here are younger than I am, their eyes wide and mouths held open as if the weight of a permanent yawn affixed itself to their jaws. And still, post-dunk, there is a kind of uncontrollable movement in the space. Not just emotional, but also physical. I'd watched most of the game comfortably positioned on the baseline with Crawford and his small crew. But after the dunk, as the game started to come to an end, young folks slowly crowded the space, eager to gain some greater proximity to the players. The game wasn't particularly close -- despite a McDaniels fourth-quarter scoring flurry to keep things somewhat in reach (McDaniels ended the game with 52) his team floundered, losing by twenty as time ran out. And so the only suspense, then, was who could effectively crowd the space between the floor and the opening to the locker room where the players were heading after the buzzer for photos, maybe to sign a thing or two on their way out the door.
J.J. SULLINGER MEANDERS BASHFULLY to center court at Ohio Dominican. He's wearing jeans and a T-shirt, a snapback tilted sideways on his head. A moment before this, Tihon Johnson held an award plaque in his hand and gave a joyful, reflective speech, a wide smile pushing his graying beard up higher on his face. "Me and this guy, back in high school, we were rivals. We used to have battles," he says, waving the plaque enthusiastically at the end of each syllable.

This is all a part of the Kingdom Tradition, an overarching set of ideals that most certainly includes basketball, but expands well beyond it. The Kingdom League, under the guidance of Johnson, is also about faith, about family, about community. To the latter point, it's about understanding that community is stitched together by both the past and the present. Greatness at the moment we're in, but also greatness in the moments before this one that makes the now possible. One acknowledgment of this is through the Kingdom Awards, awards for community legends and community service, for people who have meant something to the city, and not always through basketball alone. At halftime of every game, even in a day with three games spread out over an afternoon, Johnson gives out an award, offers a speech of gratitude to someone and makes them come to center court, even if they're a little shy about it.

J.J. Sullinger is a perfect manifestation of the usefulness of this kind of acknowledgment, especially today, as the Kingdom League semifinals are in full force. The thing about a place like Columbus, especially for those of us who spent any time in Columbus City Schools or even in schools geographically adjacent to Columbus City schools, is that you're never too far removed from knowing someone as they were once. J.J. and I are the same age, and intersected at the same middle school for a while, before he went on to star at a high school in the northern suburbs of the city, and then went to play at Arkansas, coming home to finish his college career at Ohio State. The Sullingers, collectively, are one of Ohio's most prominent basketball families. The patriarch, Satch Sullinger, was a national high school coach of the year in 2010 at Northland High School, where he coached his sons, Julian and Jared. Julian is now an assistant coach at Kent State University, where J.J.'s son Jalen plays, entering his sophomore year.

It can be a lot to keep up with upon immediate introduction, as I realize listening to a person behind me work through the family tree with the person they came to the game with, both of them seemingly becoming more confused as he tries to work it out. ("Julian is the youngest and he played at O-....no, wait, Jared is the youngest and Julian played at Kent State and he coaches at Kent State and Jar-....wait, no, J.J.'s son is there I think?")
Today, at Ohio Dominican, Satch wanders back into the gym right as halftime comes to a close. He has a massive presence but is also literally towering. He walks with a slight limp, one that makes it look like he's ducking his tall frame underneath some invisible barrier with each step. He commands the respect of the room, his eyes peeking out beneath a low hat and through dark glasses to scan the crowd. He nods and extends a wave to the people shouting Hey, Satch! or Alright now! as he makes his way to a seat.

Jared, the most decorated player in the Sullinger lineage, is currently on the floor, arms extended to the sky, a pained look on his face in the direction of a ref who, it seems, is choosing to not make eye contact. Jared won a state title in high school, was Ohio Mr. Basketball in 2009 and 2010, and Naismith Boys' High School Player of the Year in the same year his pops won the award for coaching. He also was a two-time All-American at Ohio State. He had some moments in the league, particularly during his early seasons in Boston, but back injuries and concerns about conditioning pushed him out of the NBA by 2017. He's found new life playing in China, putting together a string of dominant seasons in the Chinese Basketball Association. At the Kingdom, the word is that Jared wants to win, and not in the sense of the competitive platitudes about how everyone wants to win. He really wants to win. "He don't want Trey to get all the shine this summer," the Ohio Dominican security guard (also an avid Kingdom fan) tells me, referring to Trey Burke, Sullinger's friend and former high school teammate, who currently plays for the Rockets, but made a massive splash at the Kingdom a couple of weeks before this, dropping 63 points, eclipsing the scoring record set by Tihon Johnson himself a couple of years prior.

Jared's play during the Kingdom League this summer has been consistently good, though in this semifinal game, he's turned it up a notch. His Buckeye Prep team was in control against Reitano Sports Center in the first half, but Reitano's Scott Thomas -- who played at Buckeye Valley High and then Bowling Green -- has found himself in the midst of an impossible heater in the second half. Threes off of one leg, contested fadeaways, layups through a forest of limbs. Everything is falling, and the once comfortable lead has dissolved to single digits. This is, one would think, where Jared Sullinger, still the best player on the floor, would take over. But he's frustrated, hampered by fouls and turnovers. Until, seemingly, a light flicks on halfway through the fourth quarter. A fadeaway falls, and then a three. He pulls down a rebound with one hand and secures it so loudly with his second hand that the sound of the aching echo radiates from the ball and dances along the gym's walls.

Heroics, or stardom, or legend is sometimes simply math born out of proximity. None of us can consistently be who we were at our greatest, highest point of triumph. But we can become a vision of that person, even if it is a sort of funhouse mirror version. While Jared went to work in securing the victory for Buckeye Prep, scoring on a tough and-one, a person beside me mumbled, 'Damn, s--- look just like when he was back at Northland.' And I think that is a part of the magic of this, too. There are people here, right now, who rooted for Jared Sullinger when he was in middle school, maybe earlier. People who watched J.J. and Julian, and who heard whispers that there was a younger, even more talented brother, waiting on the horizon. A legend before freshman year. There are people here who rooted for Jared Sullinger at Ohio State. Cavs fans who tolerated watching the Celtics for a few years, just because he was pulling on the green and white. And then he was gone. It's a lot harder to watch the games in China from Columbus, Ohio. And so this is what we have. A legend comes back home and, for a stretch of time, his brilliance is as familiar now as it was then. It's a part of the Kingdom tradition, after all. Greatness is a circle.
At the time, it was Doug Christie's All Hoop, No Hype. Crawford took it over in 2005 and has been running with it ever since. He still plays -- he just played a week before I arrived -- and insists he's never going to stop. "I'm always gonna play, because it's me," he replies, almost incredulously, when I ask. "I was playing when there was no one coming. When we had 10 people in the crowd, every week."

Crawford, like everyone I share any passing words with in the greater Seattle basketball community, has a lot of gratitude for the Storm. Mentioning the Storm to people here often elicits a smile, some outburst of joy, or relief. There's a way, Crawford says, that the Storm holding it down for the city has saved Seattle from a sort of basketball purgatory that might have existed after the grief of the Sonics' exit. Today, in the midst of Hawks jerseys, there are still young folks wandering into the arena in Sue Bird or Breanna Stewart jerseys, Storm T-shirts and hats. The team has kept the city afloat, giving them basketball to be excited about. And still, even with that in mind, Crawford knows that there are young people who, most years, only get to see NBA players on TV, who can't make the trip to Portland or California to watch games. Crawford is intimately tapped in with the young people in the community. Yesterday, even in the midst of shouting instructions at Paolo from the baseline, when a young person (egged on by what seemed to be an older sibling) came up to Crawford with a marker and one of his Knicks jerseys, he stopped everything, turned his body away from the game and made eye contact, signed the jersey, asked the young person if they played, and if he'd see them out on the court in a few years. Today, when a young player who played in a youth game yesterday ambles up to us, mid-conversation, Crawford stops, gives them a couple of pointers on their handle, and tells them he'll be watching when the next game comes around.

He's endearing in this way. A cynic (which I certainly can be) may have a hard time coming to terms with any act being truly selfless, but Crawford puts so much of himself, his time, and his energy into making the Pro-Am a singularly touchable experience, specifically for young people. He asks them, every year, what NBA players they'd like to see, and then he gets to work bringing them in. He specifically doesn't tell the public which game the NBA players will be playing in during the day (on Saturday, Chet, Jaden and Paolo played in the second to last game but earlier in the year, NBA players have played in the opening game) because he wants everyone playing throughout the day to get the same set of eyes. It is, partially, about lineage and legacy, Crawford tells me. If there's a young person who plays basketball in this community, whether he coaches them or not, they're in his community, and so he cares about them.

In the same way that Seattle is uniquely suited for the success of something like the CrawsOver, Crawford himself is uniquely suited to lead it. He is respected among his old NBA peers. He's an OG through tenure, not necessarily through age. "I saw a video with Trae (Young), where he said he was watching my game growing up!" he tells me, shaking his head. "You never know, man. You never know what your game means to someone else."

When I ask about Seattle's high school basketball lineage, Crawford becomes a tour guide, of sorts, drawing out an imaginary map on the brown metal bleachers.

"It's a really concentrated area. So look, Garfield High is like Brandon Roy, Tony Wroten, Will Conroy, Jaylen Nowell. Franklin is Jason Terry, Peyton Siva, Aaron Brooks. Rainer Beach is myself, Nate (Robinson,) Terrence Williams, Dejounte Murray, Doug Christie. OK, all those schools, you can get to in 15 minutes. And O'Dea is right there too, where Paolo came out of."

He takes a small breath and reflects. "And that's what makes it special. That's what makes it different. We've grown up with each other our whole lives. We've never stopped supporting each other." When he says this last part, he nods over towards the door, as Nate Robinson walks in, head bobbing. "And everywhere I go, and everything I ever did, I took Seattle with me. Even when I was gone, I never left."

Crawford is still confused as to why and how he left the NBA. He insists, even now, that he still had some game left. The numbers would support that insistence, for what it's worth. "It took me a year and a half to really fight with that and get over it," he tells me, while watching the final moments of the game on the floor. "My wife got me into coaching. And that's what saved me. Those kids need me, for sure. But I need them, too. My whole life is dedicated to them now. And that's something."
TRAE YOUNG, JOHN COLLINS, AND DEJOUNTE MURRAY cannot physically take the floor until the floor is cleared. The mantra has been repeated on the microphone for a few minutes now, with little to no movement on the actual floor. Announcers plead with folks to take their seats while young kids press against the sidelines and onto the floor itself. My once-comfortable spot on the baseline is now infiltrated with a crowd of photographers, elbowing for space, some giving up and spreading themselves out on the floor, resting on their stomachs and kicking their feet up in the air. In some ways, it is a miracle that anyone is excited at all. It has been hours now since the doors first opened for the day, and the heat has only grown more ferocious as a greater number of bodies have been shoehorned into the gym, which was already at capacity by noon, and it is now nearly 5 p.m. When moving back against the wall, I rest my hand along the brick, only to be met with a faint, unsettling dampness. The walls themselves, exhausted, weighed down by condensation.

When the three Hawks eventually hit the floor, it was Trae Young who led the trio out, making a real meal of the process, walking slowly to center court and then walking along the sidelines while nodding. Every kid in the front row, leaping out of their seats and curling around the sideline, creating a crescent at Young's back while he settled into a layup line.

It was here where I found myself, too, almost unknowingly, with my phone out, grinning widely. Archiving not for the sake of reporting, or documenting the moment for a later and greater purpose. But doing it, at the moment, like everyone else in the building, like the kids pushing their way beyond the sideline. Documenting, merely to say, Isn't this something? And nothing else. It was almost reflexive, happening without me noticing, really. Right underneath the basket, I was as close to the action as possible, and I found myself swept away in the kind of childlike wonder and exuberance that permeated the arena by that point. There was nothing like this, before the game even tipped off. Collins, Young and Murray went through the simple motions of the layup line while the space acclimated to the newly present awe. I believe this to be a part of the magic of these moments, where the barrier between the professional superstar and the people becomes flimsy, a bit more grounded. Even for elders, there's a reversion back to a younger self, a self who was more easily susceptible to miracles.

As I migrated closer to a safe corner of the wall, I brushed shoulders, once again, with the security guard who was tasked with keeping people away from the roped-off baseline. Sweat was making fresh designs on his dark shirt, and he had a towel slung over his shoulder. In between telling kids to get back and checking the credentials of photographers trying to get beyond the ropes, he shook his head and half-laughed. "Isn't this something?" he said, making room for a momentary smile.

In the end, there was no drama to be had except for what might make the highlight reel. The game was a blowout in favor of the NBA stars, but not without its small sparks. At the start of the game, there was a tone of feistiness from the opposing team. Sometimes-NBA player Mike James put up a heroic effort to keep the game close. Shadeed Shabazz, a guard from Rainer Beach High who just finished a career starring at the University of Alaska Fairbanks, drew exuberant shouts from the crowd, picking Trae Young's pocket on attempted crossovers two times in one quarter (After the game, when I catch up with Shabazz, all smiles despite the loss, he tells me, "Ah man, I got to have a few words with Trae! But it was all good, he made me work!")
All that was left, as the second half dwindled down, was a signature highlight, which the game was, surprisingly, fairly low on. Dejounte Murray gained both cheers and groans in equal measure when he bounced the ball off of an opposing player's head (for no real reason, it seemed, though Murray would later state that he felt he was being "guarded too closely.") Collins had a hard time getting anything easy in the lane, and was sent a couple of times crashing to the floor after being on the receiving end of some overzealous challenges. One thing that the CrawsOver made clear was that from the moment every player crosses onto the floor, there is no hierarchy. For one thing, no one wants to be embarrassed. But for another thing, these courts are mostly occupied by players who have something to prove, sometimes playing against NBA stars who, by comparison, have little to prove.

And still, with that in mind, sometime late in the third quarter, Trae Young slipped the ball through the legs of an opponent and threw a no-look alley-oop to Murray, who caught the ball, and in mid-air, threw another alley-oop to Collins, who threw down a thunderous dunk. In the immediate aftermath of it, what stood out even more than the instant, ear-piercing wave of crowd noise was Young himself, who, briefly, put his hands on his head and looked at the rim in a moment of disbelief, mouthing something that looked like oh my god. It occurred to me then, as bodies rushed to the sidelines, past scant security, as heat and sound and light collapsed even more aggressively atop us all, that even the miracle-makers sometimes get to be in awe of their own miracles. In the midst of the chaos, I scanned the gym for Jamal Crawford. Along the opposite baseline, he was calmly leaning against the wall, his arms crossed, wearing a smile that could be seen from an entire length of a court away.

