The attacking player (#10) attempts to kick the ball into the net behind the opposing team's goalkeeper (here wearing red and yellow) to score a goal.
Highest governing body	FIFA Olympic Men's since the 1900 Olympics and women's since the 1996 Olympics
Paralympic5-a-side since 2004 and 7-a-side from 1984 to 2016 Association football, more commonly known as football or soccer,[a] is a team sport played between two teams of 11 players each, who almost exclusively use their feet to propel a ball around a rectangular field called a pitch. The objective of the game is to score more goals than the opposing team by moving the ball beyond the goal line into a rectangular-framed goal defended by the opposing team. Traditionally, the game has been played over two 45-minute halves, for a total match time of 90 minutes. With an estimated 250 million players active in over 200 countries and territories, it is the world's most popular sport.

The game of association football is played in accordance with the Laws of the Game, a set of rules that has been in effect since 1863 and maintained by the IFAB since 1886. The game is played with a football that is 68–70 cm (27–28 in) in circumference. The two teams compete to score goals by getting the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts, under the bar, and fully across the goal line). When the ball is in play, the players mainly use their feet, but may also use any other part of their body, such as their head, chest, and thighs, except for their hands or arms, to control, strike, or pass the ball. Only the goalkeepers may use their hands and arms, and that only within the penalty area. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner. There are situations where a goal can be disallowed, such as an offside call or a foul in the build-up to the goal. Depending on the format of the competition, an equal number of goals scored may result in a draw being declared with 1 point awarded to each team, or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shoot-out.[5]

Internationally, association football is governed by FIFA. Under FIFA, there are six continental confederations: AFC, CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL, OFC, and UEFA. Of these confederations, CONMEBOL is the oldest one, being founded in 1916. National associations (e.g. the FA in England, the U.S. Soccer in the United States, Canada Soccer in Canada, Football Australia in Australia, New Zealand Football in New Zealand, etc) are responsible for managing the game in their own countries both professionally and at an amateur level, and coordinating competitions in accordance with the Laws of the Game.

The most prestigious senior international competition is the FIFA World Cup. The men's World Cup is the most-viewed sporting event in the world, surpassing the Olympic Games.[6] The two most prestigious competitions in club football are the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Women's Champions League, which attract an extensive television audience worldwide. The final of the men's tournament is the most-watched annual sporting event in the world.[7][8]

Names for association football
Association football is one of a family of football codes that emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. Within the English-speaking world, the sport is now usually called "football" in Great Britain and most of Ulster in the north of Ireland,[9] whereas people usually call it "soccer" in regions and countries where other codes of football are prevalent, such as Australia,[10] Canada, South Africa, most of Ireland (excluding Ulster),[11] and the United States. A notable exception is New Zealand, where in the first two decades of the 21st century, under the influence of international television, "football" has been gaining prevalence, despite the dominance of other codes of football, namely rugby union and rugby league.[12]

The term soccer comes from Oxford "-er" slang, which was prevalent at the University of Oxford in England from about 1875, and is thought to have been borrowed from the slang of Rugby School. Initially spelt assoccer (a shortening of "association"), it was later reduced to the modern spelling.[13][14] This form of slang also gave rise to rugger for rugby football, fiver and tenner for five pound and ten pound notes, and the now-archaic footer that was also a name for association football.[15] The word soccer arrived at its current form in 1895 and was first recorded in 1889 in the earlier form of socca.[16]

History of association football
On the left, an episkyros player on an ancient stone carving, c. 375–400 BCE, exhibited at the National Archaeological Museum, Athens;[17] on the right, children playing cuju in Song dynasty China, 12th century
Kicking ball games arose independently multiple times across multiple cultures.[b] The Chinese competitive game cuju (蹴鞠, literally "kickball"; also known as tsu chu) resembles modern association football as well as a mix of basketball, and volleyball. [18][19] This is the earliest form of a kicking game for which there is historical evidence. The game was first recorded as in exercise in the Zhan Guo Ce, a military history from the Han dynasty.[20] Cuju players would pass the ball around, having to avoid it touching the ground at any point. It was then passed to a designated player, who attempted to kick it through the fengliu yan, a circular goal atop 10–11 meter poles.[18] During the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), cuju games were standardised and rules were established.[21] The Silk Road facilitated the transmission of cuju outside of China, especially the form of the game popular in the Tang dynasty, the period when the inflatable ball was invented and replaced the stuffed ball.[22] Other East Asian games include kemari in Japan and chuk-guk in Korea, both influenced by cuju.[23][24] Kemari originated after the year 600 during the Asuka period. It was a ceremonial rather than a competitive game, and involved the kicking of a mari, a ball made of animal skin.[25] In North America, pasuckuakohowog was a ball game played by the Algonquians; it was described as "almost identical to the kind of folk football being played in Europe at the same time, in which the ball was kicked through goals".[26]


Calcio match in Piazza Santa Maria Novella, in Florence, Italy. Painting by Jan Van der Straet.
Phaininda and episkyros were Greek ball games.[20][27] An image of an episkyros player depicted in low relief on a stele of c. 375–400 BCE in the National Archaeological Museum of Athens[17] appears on the UEFA European Championship trophy.[28] Athenaeus, writing in 228 CE, mentions the Roman ball game harpastum. Phaininda, episkyros and harpastum were played involving hands and violence. They all appear to have resembled rugby football, wrestling, and volleyball more than what is recognisable as modern football.[21][29][30][31][32][33]

In the Middle Ages, one of the best-known games was calcio storico fiorentino, which originated in the city of Florence, Italy. This sport was similar to modern football in several ways, because of the festive atmosphere in which these matches were played.[34] Another medieval sport that can be considered a type of medieval football is La Soule or Choule, played in medieval France, in which the ball was propelled by hands, feet, and sticks,[35] dating from the 12th century.[36] As with pre-codified mob football, the antecedent of all modern football codes, these five games involved more handling the ball than kicking it.[37][3]

Association football in itself does not have a classical history.[28] Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world, FIFA has described that no historical connection exists with any game played in antiquity outside Europe.[3] The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century.[38] The modern rules of association football are based on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England.

The "Laws of the University Foot Ball Club" (Cambridge Rules) of 1856
The Cambridge rules, first drawn up at the University of Cambridge in 1848, were particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes, including association football. The Cambridge rules were written at Trinity College, Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, Winchester and Shrewsbury schools. They were not universally adopted. During the 1850s, many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English-speaking world to play various forms of football. Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, formed by former public school pupils in 1857,[39] which led to the formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867. In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules.[40]


An early draft of the original hand-written 'Laws of the Game' drawn up on behalf of The Football Association by Ebenezer Cobb Morley in 1863 on display at the National Football Museum in Manchester
These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association (The FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London.[41] The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse. The Freemasons' Tavern was the setting for five more meetings of The FA between October and December 1863; the English FA eventually issued the first comprehensive set of rules named Laws of the Game, forming modern football.[42] The laws included bans on running with the ball in hand and hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding.[43] Eleven clubs, under the charge of FA secretary Ebenezer Cobb Morley, ratified the original thirteen laws of the game.[41] The sticking point was hacking, which a twelfth club at the meeting, Blackheath FC, had wanted to keep, resulting in them withdrawing from the FA.[41] Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA, and instead in 1871, along with Blackheath, formed the Rugby Football Union. The FA rules included handling of the ball by "marks" and the lack of a crossbar, rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football being developed at that time in Australia. The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s, with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games.[44]


The Aston Villa team in 1897, after winning both the FA Cup and the English Football League
The world's oldest football competition is the FA Cup, which was founded by the footballer and cricketer Charles W. Alcock, and has been contested by English teams since 1872. The first official international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of Alcock. England is also home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor.[45] The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England.[46]

Laws of the Game are determined by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).[47] The board was formed in 1886[48] after a meeting in Manchester of the Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association. FIFA, the international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to the Laws of the Game of the Football Association.[49] The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the IFAB in 1913. The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations.[50]

For most of the 20th century, Europe and South America were the dominant regions in association football. The FIFA World Cup, inaugurated in 1930, became the main stage for players of both continents to show their worth and the strength of their national teams.[51] In the second half of the century, the European Cup and the Copa Libertadores were created, and the champions of these two club competitions would contest the Intercontinental Cup to prove which team was the best in the world.[52]

In the 21st century, South America has continued to produce some of the best footballers in the world,[53] but its clubs have fallen behind the still dominant European clubs, which often sign the best players from Latin America and elsewhere.[51][53] Meanwhile, football has improved in Africa, Asia and North America,[53] and nowadays, these regions are at least on equal grounds with South America in club football,[54] although countries in the Caribbean and Oceania regions (except Australia) have yet to make a mark in international football.[55][56] When it comes to men's national teams, Europeans and South Americans continue to dominate the FIFA World Cup, as no team from any other region has managed to even reach the final.[51][53] These regional trends do not hold true for the women's game, as the United States women's national team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup four times, more than any other women's team.[57]

Football is played at a professional level all over the world. Millions of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams,[58] while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet.[59][60] A very large number of people also play football at an amateur level. According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football.[61] Football has the highest global television audience in sport.[62]

In many parts of the world, football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations. Ryszard Kapuściński says that Europeans who are polite, modest, or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games.[63] The Ivory Coast national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 2006[64] and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouaké, an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time.[65] By contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras.[66] The sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence of the 1990s, when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into rioting in May 1990.[67]

 Women's association football
Women's association football has historically seen opposition, with national associations severely curbing its development and several outlawing it completely. Women may have been playing football for as long as the game has existed. Evidence shows that a similar ancient game (cuju, or tsu chu) was played by women during the Han dynasty (25–220 CE), as female figures are depicted in frescoes of the period playing tsu chu.[68][69] There are also reports of annual football matches played by women in Midlothian, Scotland, during the 1790s.[70][71]

North team of the British Ladies', the first organised women's football team, here pictured in March 1895
Association football, the modern game, has documented early involvement of women.[71] In 1863, football governing bodies introduced standardised rules to prohibit violence on the pitch, making it more socially acceptable for women to play.[72] The first match recorded by the Scottish Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow.[70] In England, the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.[72] Women's football has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, particularly in the United Kingdom.[73]

Association football continued to be played by women since the time of the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century.[73][74] The best-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894. It was named the British Ladies' Football Club. Honeyball is quoted as, "I founded the association late last year [1894], with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the 'ornamental and useless' creatures men have pictured. I must confess, my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation, and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs, especially those which concern them most."[75] Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women's football. However, the women's game was frowned upon by the British football associations and continued without their support. It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the "masculinity" of the game.[76]


Women's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World War, when female employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game, much as it had done for men 50 years earlier. The most successful team of the era was Dick, Kerr Ladies F.C. of Preston, England. The team played in one of the first women's international matches against a French XI team in 1920,[77][78] and also made up most of the England team against a Scottish Ladies XI in the same year, winning 22–0.[70]

Despite being more popular than some men's football events, with one match seeing a 53,000 strong crowd in 1920,[79][80] women's football in England suffered a blow in 1921 when The Football Association outlawed the playing of the game on association members' pitches,[81] stating that "the game of football is quite unsuitable for females and should not be encouraged."[82] Players and football writers have argued that this ban was, in fact, due to envy of the large crowds that women's matches attracted,[80] and because the FA had no control over the money made from the women's game.[82] The FA ban led to the formation of the short-lived English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds.[83] Women's football also faced bans in several other countries, notably in Brazil from 1941 to 1979,[84] in France from 1941 to 1970,[85] and in Germany from 1955 to 1970.[86]


A young Finnish girls' football team in Sweden
Restrictions began to be reduced in the 1960s and 1970s. The Italian women's football league was established in 1968.[87] In December 1969, the Women's Football Association was formed in England,[73][88] with the sport eventually becoming the most prominent team sport for women in the United Kingdom.[73] Two unofficial women's World Cups were organised by the FIEFF in 1970 and in 1971. Also in 1971, UEFA members voted to officially recognise women's football,[73] while The Football Association rescinded the ban that prohibited women from playing on association members' pitches in England.[88]

Women's football still faces many struggles, but its worldwide growth[89] has seen major competitions being launched at both the national and international levels, mirroring the men's competitions. The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991: the first tournament was held in China, featuring 12 teams from the respective six confederations. The World Cup has been held every four years since;[90] by 2019, it had expanded to 24 national teams, and 1.12 billion viewers watched the competition.[91] Four years later, FIFA targeted the 32-team 2023 Women's World Cup at an audience of 2 billion,[92] while about 1.4 million tickets were sold, setting a Women's World Cup record.[93] Women's football has been an Olympic event since 1996.[94]

North America is the dominant region in women's football, with the United States winning the most FIFA Women's World Cups and Olympic tournaments. Europe and Asia come second and third in terms of international success,[95][96] and the women's game has been improving in South America.[97]

One half of a professional football match (45 minutes) between Slovenian clubs NK Nafta 1903 and NK Dob. The score after the half is 0–0.
Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game. The game is played using a spherical ball of 68–70 cm (27–28 in) circumference,[98] known as the football (or soccer ball). Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw. Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to represent their team in the coin toss before kick-off or penalty kicks.[5]

The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they must use both their hands during a throw-in restart. Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around, they may use any part of their body (notably, "heading" with the forehead)[99] other than their hands or arms.[100] Within normal play, all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch, though players may not pass to teammates who are in an offside position.[101]

During gameplay, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a teammate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; however, physical contact between opponents is restricted. Football is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules. After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart.[102]

These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends the most time. For example, there are central defenders and left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination. The number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style of play. While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time.[106] The layout of a team's players is known as a formation. Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager.[107]

Laws
"Rules of football" redirects here. For the rules of other football games, see Football.
Further information: Laws of the Game (association football)
There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection of stipulations and guidelines. The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football for both sexes, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors and people with physical disabilities are permitted.[c] The laws are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game. The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are maintained by the IFAB.[108] In addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of association football.[109][110] Within the United States, Major League Soccer used a distinct ruleset during the 1990s[111] and the National Federation of State High School Associations and NCAA still use rulesets that are comparable to, but different from, the IFAB Laws.[citation needed]

Players, equipment, and officials
See also: Association football positions, Formation (association football), Substitute (association football), and Kit (association football)

The referee officiates in a football match
Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper. Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven. Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the Laws.[104]

The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt, shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards. An athletic supporter and protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and professionals.[112][113] Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury.[114] Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player, such as jewellery or watches. The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials.[115]

A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game. The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive international and domestic league games is five in 90 minutes,[116] with each team being allowed one more if the game should go into extra-time; the permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches. Common reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game. In standard adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match.[117] IFAB recommends "that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team". Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations.[118]

A game is officiated by a referee, who has "full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed" (Law 5), and whose decisions are final. The referee is assisted by two assistant referees. In many high-level games there is also a fourth official who assists the referee and may replace another official should the need arise.[119]

Goal line technology is used to measure if the whole ball has crossed the goal-line thereby determining whether a goal has been scored or not; this was brought in to prevent controversy. Video assistant referees (VAR) have also been increasingly introduced in high-level matches to assist officials through video replays to correct clear and obvious mistakes. There are four types of calls that can be reviewed: mistaken identity in awarding a red or yellow card, goals and whether there was a violation during the buildup, direct red card decisions, and penalty decisions.[120]

Ball Main article: Ball (association football)
A typical ball The ball is spherical with a circumference of between 68 and 70 cm (27 and 28 in), a weight in the range of 410 to 450 g (14 to 16 oz), and a pressure between 0.6 and 1.1 standard atmospheres (8.5 and 15.6 pounds per square inch) at sea level. In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together, with a latex bladder for pressurisation, but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic.[121][122]

Pitch Main article: Football pitch
Standard pitch measurements
As the Laws were formulated in England, and were initially administered solely by the four British football associations within IFAB, the standard dimensions of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units. The Laws now express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents (followed by traditional units in brackets), though use of imperial units remains popular in English-speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication (or only partial metrication), such as Britain.[123]

The length of the pitch, or field, for international adult matches is in the range of 100–110 m (110–120 yd) and the width is in the range of 64–75 m (70–80 yd). Fields for non-international matches may be 90–120 m (100–130 yd) in length and 45–90 m (50–100 yd) in width, provided the pitch does not become square. In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m (115 yd) long and 68 m (74 yd) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches;[124] however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented.[125]

The longer boundary lines are touchlines, while the shorter boundaries (on which the goals are placed) are goal lines. A rectangular goal is positioned on each goal line, midway between the two touchlines.[126] The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 7.32 m (24 ft) apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 2.44 m (8 ft) above the ground. Nets are usually placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws.[127]

In front of the goal is the penalty area. This area is marked by the goal line, two lines starting on the goal line 16.5 m (18 yd) from the goalposts and extending 16.5 m (18 yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a line joining them. This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick. Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, penalty kicks and corner kicks.[128]

Duration and tie-breaking methods
90-minute ordinary time
A standard adult football match consists of two halves of 45 minutes each. Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play. There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves. The end of the match is known as full-time.[129] The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This added time is called "additional time" in FIFA documents,[130][131] but is most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, while lost time can also be used as a synonym. The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee. Stoppage time does not fully compensate for the time in which the ball is out of play, and a 90-minute game typically involves about an hour of "effective playing time".[132][133] The referee alone signals the end of the match. In matches where a fourth official is appointed, towards the end of the half, the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time they intend to add. The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number. The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee.[129] Added time was introduced because of an incident in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa. Trailing 1–0 with two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty kick. Villa's goalkeeper deliberately kicked the ball far out of play; by the time it was recovered, the clock had run out and the game was over, leaving Stoke unable to attempt the penalty.[134] The same law also states that the duration of either half is extended until a penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed; thus, no game can end with an uncompleted penalty.[135]

Tie-breaking
Main article: Determining the Outcome of a Match (association football)

Most knockout competitions use a penalty shoot-out to decide the winner if a match ends as a draw
In league competitions, games may end in a draw. In knockout competitions where a winner is required, various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock; some competitions may invoke replays.[136] A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of penalty shoot-outs (known officially in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the penalty mark") to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament or be the champion. Goals scored during extra time periods count towards the final score of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament, with goals scored in a penalty shoot-out not making up part of the final score.[5]

In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses. Where aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home. If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially a penalty shoot-out are required.[5]

Ball in and out of play
Main article: Ball in and out of play

A player takes a free kick, while the opposition form a "wall" to try to block the ball
Under the Laws, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a kick-off until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:

Kick-off: following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each period of play.[102]
Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to the opposing team to that which last touched the ball.[137]
Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team; awarded to defending team.[138]
Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team; awarded to attacking team.[139]
Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred. A goal may not be scored directly (without the ball first touching another player) from an indirect free kick.[140]
Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" fouls.[140] A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area.[141]
Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective.[102]
Misconduct
Main article: Foul (association football)
On-field


Players are cautioned with a yellow card, and dismissed from the game with a red card. These colours were first introduced at the 1970 FIFA World Cup and used consistently since.
A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game while the ball is in play. The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12. Handling the ball deliberately, tripping an opponent, or pushing an opponent, are examples of "penal fouls", punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred. Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick.[100]

The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution (yellow card) or dismissal (red card). A second yellow card in the same game leads to a red card, which results in a dismissal. A player given a yellow card is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in their official notebook. If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought on in their place and the player may not participate in further play. Misconduct may occur at any time, and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed, the definitions are broad. In particular, the offence of "unsporting behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game, even if they are not listed as specific offences. A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player, substitute, substituted player, and to non-players such as managers and support staff.[100][142]

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known as "playing an advantage".[143] The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few seconds". Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play.[144]

The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final.[145] The score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows that decisions (including awards/non-awards of goals) were incorrect.[citation needed]

Off-field
See also: Foul (association football) § Post-match
Along with the general administration of the sport, football associations and competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game, dealing with issues such as comments to the press, clubs' financial management, doping, age fraud and match fixing. Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players who are sent off in a game.[146] Some on-field incidents, if considered very serious (such as allegations of racial abuse), may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card.[d] Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh.[146]

Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on clubs as a whole. Penalties may include fines, point deductions (in league competitions) or even expulsion from competitions. For example, the English Football League deduct 12 points from any team that enters financial administration.[147] Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture. Teams that had forfeited a game or had been forfeited against would be awarded a technical loss or win.[citation needed]

Governing bodies
See also: Association football around the world

Headquarters of FIFA, the world governing body of football
The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, such as futsal and beach soccer)[c] is FIFA. The FIFA headquarters are located in Zürich, Switzerland. Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these are:[148]

Asia: Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
South America: Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)
National associations (or national federations) oversee football within individual countries. These are generally synonymous with sovereign states (for example, the Cameroonian Football Federation in Cameroon), but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for example, the Scottish Football Association in Scotland). 211 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations.[148] Other national associations may be members of continental confederations but otherwise not participate in FIFA competitions.[149]

While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to international competition, the actual Laws of the Game are set by the IFAB, where each of the UK Associations has one vote, while FIFA collectively has four votes.[50]

International competitions
List of association football competitions
The FIFA World Cup is the largest international competition in football and the world's most viewed sporting event
International competitions in association football principally consist of two varieties: competitions involving representative national teams or those involving clubs based in multiple nations and national leagues. International football, without qualification, most often refers to the former. In the case of international club competition, it is the country of origin of the clubs involved, not the nationalities of their players, that renders the competition international in nature.[citation needed]

The major international competition in football and the most prestigious is the World Cup, organised by FIFA. This competition has taken place every four years since 1930, with the exception of the 1942 and 1946 tournaments, which were cancelled because of World War II. As of 2022, over 200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals.[150] The finals tournament involved 32 national teams (expanding to 48 teams for the 2026 tournament) competing over a four-week period.[151][e] The World Cup is the world's most widely viewed and most followed sporting event, with the 2022 tournament estimated to be watched by 5 billion people, more than 60% of the global population.[152] The 1958 World Cup saw the emergence of Pelé as a global sporting star, a period that coincided with "the explosive spread of television, which massively amplified his presence everywhere".[153] The current champions are Argentina, who won their third title at the 2022 tournament in Qatar.[154] The FIFA Women's World Cup has been held every four years since 1991. Under the tournament's current format that was expanded in 2023, national teams vie for 31 slots in a three-year qualification phase, while the host nation's team enters automatically as the 32nd slot.[155] The current champions are Spain, after winning their first title in the 2023 tournament.[156]

There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles when FIFA and the International Olympic Committee had disagreed over the status of amateur players.[157][158] Before the inception of the World Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) were the most prestigious international event. Originally, the tournament was for amateurs only.[49] As professionalism spread around the world, the gap in quality between the World Cup and the Olympics widened. The countries that benefited most were the Soviet Bloc countries of Eastern Europe, where top athletes were state-sponsored while retaining their status as amateurs. Between 1948 and 1980, 23 out of 27 Olympic medals were won by Eastern Europe, with only Sweden (gold in 1948 and bronze in 1952), Denmark (bronze in 1948 and silver in 1960) and Japan (bronze in 1968) breaking their dominance. For the 1984 Los Angeles Games, the IOC allowed professional players to compete. Since 1992, male competitors must be under 23 years old, although since 1996, three players over the age of 23 have been allowed per squad.[159] A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic tournament.[160]

Spanish footballers Fernando Torres, Juan Mata, and Sergio Ramos celebrating winning the UEFA European Championship in 2012
After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are the continental championships, which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams. These are the European Championship (UEFA), the Copa América (CONMEBOL), the Africa Cup of Nations (CAF), the Asian Cup (AFC), the Gold Cup (CONCACAF) and the Nations Cup (OFC).[161] These competitions are not strictly limited to members of the continental confederations, with guest teams from other continents sometimes invited to compete.[162] The FIFA Confederations Cup was contested by the winners of all six continental championships, the current FIFA World Cup champions, and the country which was hosting the next World Cup. This was generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and did not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself.[161] The tournament was discontinued following the 2017 edition with its calendar slot replaced by an expanded FIFA Club World Cup.[163] The Finallisima was revitalized in 2022, and is contested between the Copa America and European Championship winners. UEFA Nations League and the CONCACAF Nations League were introduced in the late 2010s to replace international friendlies during the two-year cycle between major tournaments.[164]

The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between national champions, for example, the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America. The winners of each continental competition contest the FIFA Intercontinental Cup, held annually, and the FIFA Club World Cup, held once every four years.[165]

Domestic competitions

This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Main articles: Geography of association football and Geography of women's association football

A 2009 Spanish La Liga match between Real Madrid and Barcelona. The fixture, known as El Clásico, is one of the most renowned in sport.[166]
In each country, football clubs are usually federated in associations or leagues that organize official tournaments among themselves, from which the champions of each country and the teams that will participate in international tournaments emerge. There is no unique system of tournaments and each national league organizes them according to its traditions.

The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results. Teams are placed into tables, placing them in order according to points accrued. In the Old World (Africa, Asia and Europe), each team plays every other team in its league at home and away in each season, in a round-robin tournament. At the end of a season, the top team is declared the champion. The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division, and one or more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower division.[167]

The main exceptions to this system occur in the New World (Americas) and Australia:
The majority of the Latin American leagues (including Liga MX from Mexico and Liga Profesional de Fútbol from Argentina) divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish for Opening and Closing), awarding a champion for each.[168] After a first phase using points in a round-robin tournament, Latin American leagues usually have a knockout phase, with a final defining the champion of each Apertura and Clausura tournament. In some countries the winners of the Apertura and Clausura play each other in a playoff for the season title.
The Brazilian Serie A uses a single-season double round-robin format to decide the champions, similar to those in European leagues, though played between May and December. Brazilian clubs also participate in the state leagues from January to April, some of which do feature a split season format similar to the Apertura and Clausura. Brazil has never used an Apertura and Clausura system in its national tournament, but rather many different systems with play-offs until 2002.
Major League Soccer in the United States and Canada uses a closed league system (without promotion and relegation) and a conference system, similar to that used in other sports leagues in both countries. In each conference, clubs participate in a round-robin tournament, with those with the best points during the regular season qualifying for the playoffs, with a final to determine the champion.
The A-League in Australia uses a closed league system, at the end of a regular season in a round-robin tournament format, the clubs with the best points compete in playoffs to determine the league champion.
The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may also be eligible to play in international club competitions in the following season. Most countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions organised on a knock-out basis. These include the domestic cup, which may be open to all eligible teams in a country's league system—both professional and amateur—and is organised by the national federation.[169]

Some countries' top divisions feature highly-paid star players; in smaller countries, lower divisions, and many women's clubs, players may be part-timers with a second job, or amateurs. The five top European leagues – Premier League (England),[170] Bundesliga (Germany), La Liga (Spain), Serie A (Italy), and Ligue 1 (France) – attract most of the world's best players and, during the 2006–07 season, each of these leagues had a total wage cost in excess of €600 million.[171][needs update] These leagues also generated a combined €17.2 billion in revenue in the 2021–22 season from television contracts, matchday tickets, sponsorships, and other sources.[172]

Variants and casual play
See also: List of types of football
Variants of football have been codified for reduced-sized teams (i.e. five-a-side football) play in non-field environments (i.e. beach soccer, indoor soccer, and futsal) and for teams with disabilities (i.e. paralympic association football).

Street football can be played with only minimal equipment – a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to mark the positions of two sets of goalposts. Such games can have team sizes that vary from eleven-a-side, can use a limited or modified subset of the official rules, and can be self-officiated by the players.

Soccer-Kamada, Kubo strike as Japan become first nation to qualify for World Cup • Mar. 20, 2025, 3:28 AM ET (The Star) 
football, game in which two teams of 11 players, using any part of their bodies except their hands and arms, try to maneuver the ball into the opposing team’s goal. Only the goalkeeper is permitted to handle the ball and may do so only within the penalty area surrounding the goal. The team that scores more goals wins.

Carlos Alberto Torres
Carlos Alberto TorresCaptain Carlos Alberto Torres holding the Jules Rimet trophy aloft after Brazil's triumph at the 1970 World Cup.
Football is the world’s most popular ball game in numbers of participants and spectators. Simple in its principal rules and essential equipment, the sport can be played almost anywhere, from official football playing fields (pitches) to gymnasiums, streets, school playgrounds, parks, or beaches. Football’s governing body, the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), estimated that at the turn of the 21st century there were approximately 250 million football players and over 1.3 billion people “interested” in football; in 2010 a combined television audience of more than 26 billion watched football’s premier tournament, the quadrennial monthlong World Cup finals.

History
The early years
The history behind the FIFA World Cup
The history behind the FIFA World CupWatch this video to learn more about the history of the FIFA World Cup.
See all videos for this article
Modern football originated in Britain in the 19th century. Since before medieval times, “folk football” games had been played in towns and villages according to local customs and with a minimum of rules. Industrialization and urbanization, which reduced the amount of leisure time and space available to the working class, combined with a history of legal prohibitions against particularly violent and destructive forms of folk football to undermine the game’s status from the early 19th century onward. However, football was taken up as a winter game between residence houses at public (independent) schools such as Winchester College, Charterhouse, and Eton College. Each school had its own rules; some allowed limited handling of the ball and others did not. The variance in rules made it difficult for public schoolboys entering university to continue playing except with former schoolmates. As early as 1843 an attempt to standardize and codify the rules of play was made at the University of Cambridge, whose students joined most public schools in 1848 in adopting these “Cambridge rules,” which were further spread by Cambridge graduates who formed football clubs. In 1863 a series of meetings involving clubs from metropolitan London and surrounding counties produced the printed rules of football, which prohibited the carrying of the ball. Thus, the “handling” game of rugby remained outside the newly formed Football Association (FA). Indeed, by 1870 all handling of the ball except by the goalkeeper was prohibited by the FA.

The new rules were not universally accepted in Britain, however; many clubs retained their own rules, especially in and around Sheffield. Although this northern English city was the home of the first provincial club to join the FA, in 1867 it also gave birth to the Sheffield Football Association, the forerunner of later county associations. Sheffield and London clubs played two matches against each other in 1866, and a year later a match pitting a club from Middlesex against one from Kent and Surrey was played under the revised rules. In 1871 15 FA clubs accepted an invitation to enter a cup competition and to contribute to the purchase of a trophy. By 1877 the associations of Great Britain had agreed upon a uniform code, 43 clubs were in competition, and the London clubs’ initial dominance had diminished.

Serena Williams poses with the Daphne Akhurst Trophy after winning the Women's Singles final against Venus Williams of the United States on day 13 of the 2017 Australian Open at Melbourne Park on January 28, 2017 in Melbourne, Australia. (tennis, sports)
Britannica Quiz
Great Moments in Sports Quiz
Professionalism
The development of modern football was closely tied to processes of industrialization and urbanization in Victorian Britain. Most of the new working-class inhabitants of Britain’s industrial towns and cities gradually lost their old bucolic pastimes, such as badger-baiting, and sought fresh forms of collective leisure. From the 1850s onward, industrial workers were increasingly likely to have Saturday afternoons off work, and so many turned to the new game of football to watch or to play. Key urban institutions such as churches, trade unions, and schools organized working-class boys and men into recreational football teams. Rising adult literacy spurred press coverage of organized sports, while transport systems such as the railways or urban trams enabled players and spectators to travel to football games. Average attendance in England rose from 4,600 in 1888 to 7,900 in 1895, rising to 13,200 in 1905 and reaching 23,100 at the outbreak of World War I. Football’s popularity eroded public interest in other sports, notably cricket.

Leading clubs, notably those in Lancashire, started charging admission to spectators as early as the 1870s and so, despite the FA’s amateurism rule, were in a position to pay illicit wages to attract highly skilled working-class players, many of them hailing from Scotland. Working-class players and northern English clubs sought a professional system that would provide, in part, some financial reward to cover their “broken time” (time lost from their other work) and the risk of injury. The FA remained staunchly elitist in sustaining a policy of amateurism that protected upper and upper-middle class influence over the game.

The issue of professionalism reached a crisis in England in 1884, when the FA expelled two clubs for using professional players. However, the payment of players had become so commonplace by then that the FA had little option but to sanction the practice a year later, despite initial attempts to restrict professionalism to reimbursements for broken time. The consequence was that northern clubs, with their large supporter bases and capacity to attract better players, came to prominence. As the influence of working-class players rose in football, the upper classes took refuge in other sports, notably cricket and rugby union. Professionalism also sparked further modernization of the game through the establishment of the Football League, which allowed the leading dozen teams from the North and Midlands to compete systematically against each other from 1888 onward. A lower, second division was introduced in 1893, and the total number of teams increased to 28. The Irish and Scots formed leagues in 1890. The Southern League began in 1894 but was absorbed by the Football League in 1920. Yet football did not become a major profit-making business during this period. Professional clubs became limited liability companies primarily to secure land for gradual development of stadium facilities. Most clubs in England were owned and controlled by businessmen but shareholders received very low, if any, dividends; their main reward was an enhanced public status through running the local club.

2019 Asian Cup final
2019 Asian Cup finalHassan al-Haydos of Qatar in action against Takumi Minamino of Japan during the AFC Asian Cup final match between Japan and Qatar at Zayed Sports City Stadium on February 1, 2019, in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Although Englishman Daniel Woolfall was elected FIFA president in 1906 and all of the home nations (England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales) were admitted as members by 1911, British football associations were disdainful of the new body. FIFA members accepted British control over the rules of football via the International Board, which had been established by the home nations in 1882. Nevertheless, in 1920 the British associations resigned their FIFA memberships after failing to persuade other members that Germany, Austria, and Hungary should be expelled following World War I. The British associations rejoined FIFA in 1924 but soon after insisted upon a very rigid definition of amateurism, notably for Olympic football. Other nations again failed to follow their lead, and the British resigned once more in 1928, remaining outside FIFA until 1946. When FIFA established the World Cup championship, British insouciance toward the international game continued. Without membership in FIFA, the British national teams were not invited to the first three competitions (1930, 1934, and 1938). For the next competition, held in 1950, FIFA ruled that the two best finishers in the British home nations tournament would qualify for World Cup play; England won, but Scotland (which finished second) chose not to compete for the World Cup.

Despite sometimes fractious international relations, football continued to rise in popularity. It made its official Olympic debut at the London Games in 1908, and it has since been played in each of the Summer Games (except for the 1932 Games in Los Angeles). FIFA also grew steadily—especially in the latter half of the 20th century, when it strengthened its standing as the game’s global authority and regulator of competition. Guinea became FIFA’s 100th member in 1961; at the turn of the 21st century, more than 200 nations were registered FIFA members, which is more than the number of countries that belong to the United Nations.

Carli Lloyd
Carli LloydCarli Lloyd (left) of the United States scoring a penalty goal during the semifinal match against Germany in the FIFA Women's World Cup at the Olympic Stadium in Montreal, June 30, 2015.
The World Cup finals remain football’s premier tournament, but other important tournaments have emerged under FIFA guidance. Two different tournaments for young players began in 1977 and 1985, and these became, respectively, the World Youth Championship (for those 20 years old and younger) and the Under-17 World Championship. Futsal, the world indoor five-a-side championship, started in 1989. Two years later the first Women’s World Cup was played in China. In 1992 FIFA opened the Olympic football tournament to players aged under 23 years, and four years later the first women’s Olympic football tournament was held. The World Club Championship debuted in Brazil in 2000. The Under-19 Women’s World Championship was inaugurated in 2002.

FIFA membership is open to all national associations. They must accept FIFA’s authority, observe the laws of football, and possess a suitable football infrastructure (i.e., facilities and internal organization). FIFA statutes require members to form continental confederations. The first of these, the Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (commonly known as CONMEBOL), was founded in South America in 1916. In 1954 the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) were established. Africa’s governing body, the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF), was founded in 1957. The Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF) followed four years later. The Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) appeared in 1966. These confederations may organize their own club, international, and youth tournaments, elect representatives to FIFA’s Executive Committee, and promote football in their specific continents as they see fit. In turn, all football players, agents, leagues, national associations, and confederations must recognize the authority of FIFA’s Arbitration Tribunal for Football, which effectively functions as football’s supreme court in serious disputes.

Until the early 1970s, control of FIFA (and thus of world football) was firmly in the hands of northern Europeans. Under the presidencies of the Englishmen Arthur Drewry (1955–61) and Stanley Rous (1961–74), FIFA adopted a rather conservative patrician relationship to the national and continental bodies. It survived on modest income from the World Cup finals, and relatively little was done to promote football in developing countries or to explore the game’s business potential within the West’s postwar economic boom. FIFA’s leadership was more concerned with matters of regulation, such as confirming amateur status for Olympic competition or banning those associated with illegal transfers of players with existing contracts. For example, Colombia (1951–54) and Australia (1960–63) were suspended temporarily from FIFA after permitting clubs to recruit players who had broken contracts elsewhere in the world.

Growing African and Asian membership within FIFA undermined European control. In 1974 Brazilian João Havelange was elected president, gaining large support from developing nations. Under Havelange, FIFA was transformed from an international gentlemen’s club into a global corporation: billion-dollar television deals and partnerships with major transnational corporations were established during the 1980s and ’90s. While some earnings were reinvested through FIFA development projects—primarily in Asia, Africa, and Central America—the biggest political reward for developing countries has been the expansion of the World Cup finals to include more countries from outside Europe and South America.
England and Scotland had the first leagues, but clubs sprang up in most European nations in the 1890s and 1900s, enabling these nations to found their own leagues. Many Scottish professional players migrated south to join English clubs, introducing English players and audiences to more-advanced ball-playing skills and to the benefits of teamwork and passing. Up to World War II, the British continued to influence football’s development through regular club tours overseas and the Continental coaching careers of former players. Itinerant Scots were particularly prominent in central Europe. The interwar Danubian school of football emerged from the coaching legacies and expertise of John Madden in Prague and Jimmy Hogan in Austria.
Wayne Rooney
Wayne RooneyEngland's Wayne Rooney in action against Portugal during a FIFA World Cup quarter-final match against Portugal in Gelsenkirchen, Germany, July 1, 2006.
Club football reflects the distinctive political and cultural complexities of European regions. In Britain, partisan football has been traditionally associated with the industrial working class, notably in cities such as Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, and Newcastle. In Spain, clubs such as FC Barcelona and Athletic Bilbao are symbols of strong nationalist identity for Catalans and Basques, respectively. In France, many clubs have facilities that are open to the local community and reflect the nation’s corporatist politics in being jointly owned and administered by private investors and local governments. In Italy, clubs such as Fiorentina, Inter Milan, SSC Napoli, and AS Roma embody deep senses of civic and regional pride that predate Italian unification in the 19th century.
Serena Williams poses with the Daphne Akhurst Trophy after winning the Women's Singles final against Venus Williams of the United States on day 13 of the 2017 Australian Open at Melbourne Park on January 28, 2017 in Melbourne, Australia. (tennis, sports)
Britannica QuizNorth and Central America and the Caribbean
Football was brought to North America in the 1860s, and by the mid-1880s informal matches had been contested by Canadian and American teams. It soon faced competition from other sports, including variant forms of football. In Canada, Scottish émigrés were particularly prominent in the game’s early development; however, Canadians subsequently turned to ice hockey as their national sport.

In the United States, gridiron football emerged early in the 20th century as the most popular sport. But, beyond elite universities and schools, soccer (as the sport is popularly called in the United States) was played widely in some cities with large immigrant populations such as Philadelphia, Chicago, Cleveland (Ohio), and St. Louis (Missouri), as well as New York City and Los Angeles after Hispanic migrations. The U.S. Soccer Federation formed in 1913, affiliated with FIFA, and sponsored competitions. Between the world wars, the United States attracted scores of European emigrants who played football for local teams sometimes sponsored by companies.

Football in Central America struggled to gain a significant foothold in competition against baseball. In Costa Rica, the football federation founded the national league championship in 1921, but subsequent development in the region was slower, with belated FIFA membership for countries such as El Salvador (1938), Nicaragua (1950), and Honduras (1951). In the Caribbean, football traditionally paled in popularity to cricket in former British colonies. In Jamaica, football was highly popular in urban townships, but it did not capture the imagination of the country until 1998, when the national team—featuring several players who had gained success in Britain and were dubbed the “Reggae Boyz”—qualified for the World Cup finals.

Pelé
PeléBrazilian footballer Pelé, c. 1958.
North American leagues and tournaments saw an infusion of professional players in 1967, beginning with the wholesale importation of foreign teams to represent American cities. The North American Soccer League (NASL) formed a year later and struggled until the New York Cosmos signed the Brazilian superstar Pelé in 1975. Other aging international stars soon followed, and crowds grew to European proportions, but a regular fan base remained elusive, and NASL folded in 1985. An indoor football tournament, founded in 1978, evolved into a league and flourished for a while but collapsed in 1992.

Mia Hamm
Mia HammAmerican football (soccer) player Mia Hamm (left).
In North America football did establish itself as the relatively less-violent alternative to gridiron football and as a more socially inclusive sport for women. It is particularly popular among college and high-school students across the United States. After hosting an entertaining World Cup finals in 1994, the United States possessed some 16 million football players nationwide, up to 40 percent of whom were female. In 1996 a new attempt at establishing a professional outdoor league was made. Major League Soccer (MLS) was more modest in ambition than NASL, being originally played in only 10 U.S. cities, with greater emphasis on local players and a relatively tight salary cap. The MLS proved to be the most successful American soccer league, expanding to 29 teams (with three in Canada) by 2024 while also signing a number of lucrative broadcasting deals with American television networks and some star players from European leagues, with Inter Miami’s signing of Lionel Messi being perhaps the best known example. The United States hosted and won the Women’s World Cup finals in 1999, attracting enthusiastic local support. The success of the MLS and the Women’s World Cup led to the creation of a women’s professional league in 2001. The Women’s United Soccer Association (WUSA) began with eight teams and featured the world’s star player, Mia Hamm, but it disbanded in 2003.

North American national associations are members of the continental body, CONCACAF, and Mexico is the traditional regional powerhouse. Mexico has won the CONCACAF Gold Cup nine times since it was first contested in 1991, and Mexican clubs have dominated the CONCACAF Champions Cup for clubs since it began in 1962. British influence in mining and railroads encouraged the founding of football clubs in Mexico in the late 19th century. A national league was established in 1903. Mexico is exceptional in that its mass preference for football runs counter to the sporting tastes of its North American neighbors. The national league system is the most commercially successful in the region and attracts players from all over the Western Hemisphere. Despite high summer humidity and stadiums at high elevations, Mexico has hosted two of the most memorable World Cup finals, in 1970 and 1986, from which Brazil and Argentina (led by the game’s then greatest players, Pelé and Maradona, respectively) emerged as the respective winners. While the national team has been ranked highly by FIFA, often figuring in the top ten, Mexico initially did not produce the world-class caliber of players expected of such a large football-crazed nation. Hugo Sanchez (at Real Madrid) was the only Mexican player to reach the highest world level in the 20th century, but the 21st saw a number of Mexican standouts excel with top European clubs.

Richard C. Giulianotti
South America
Football first came to South America in the 19th century through the port of Buenos Aires, Argentina, where European sailors played the game. Members of the British community there formed the first club, the Buenos Aires Football Club (FC), in 1867; about the same time, British railway workers started another club, in the town of Rosario, Argentina. The first Argentinian league championship was played in 1893, but most of the players belonged to the British community, a pattern that continued until the early 20th century.

Brazil is believed to be the second South American country where the game was established. Charles Miller, a leading player in England, came to Brazil in 1894 and introduced football in São Paulo; that city’s athletic club was the first to take up the sport. In Colombia, British engineers and workers building a railroad near Barranquilla first played football in 1903, and the Barranquilla FBC was founded in 1909. In Uruguay, British railway workers were the first to play, and in 1891 they founded the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club (now the famous Peñarol), which played both cricket and football. In Chile, British sailors initiated play in Valparaíso, establishing the Valparaíso FC in 1889. In Paraguay, Dutchman William Paats introduced the game at a school where he taught physical education, but the country’s first (and still leading) club, Olimpia, was formed by a local man who became enthusiastic after seeing the game in Buenos Aires in 1902. In Bolivia the first footballers were a Chilean and students who had studied in Europe, and in Peru they were expatriate Britons. In Venezuela, British miners are known to have played football in the 1880s.

Soon local people across South America began taking up and following the sport in ever greater numbers. Boys, mostly from poorer backgrounds, played from an early age, with passion, on vacant land and streets. Clubs and players gained popularity, and professionalism entered the sport in most countries around the 1930s—although many players had been paid secretly before then by their clubs. The exodus of South American players to European clubs that paid higher salaries began after the 1930 World Cup and has steadily increased.

By the late 1930s, football had become a crucial aspect of popular culture in many South American nations; ethnic and national identities were constructed and played out on an increasingly international stage. In South American nations, nonwhite players fought a successful struggle to play at the top level: in Rio de Janeiro, Vasco da Gama was the first club to recruit Black players and promptly stormed to the league championship in 1923, encouraging other clubs to follow suit. In Uruguay, a nation of largely mixed European descent, local players learned both the physical style played by the English and the more refined passing game of the Scots, producing a versatility that helped their national team win two Olympic championships and the World Cup between 1924 and 1930.

In 1916, South American countries were the first to hold a regular continental championship—later known as the Copa América. In 1960 the South American club championship (Libertadores Cup) was started; it has been played annually by the continent’s leading clubs (with the winner playing the European club champion), and, as a result of its popularity, various other international competitions have also been held between clubs. Domestic league championships are split into two or more tournaments each season with frequent variations in format.

European sailors, soldiers, traders, engineers, and missionaries brought football with them to Africa in the second half of the 19th century. The first documented match took place in Cape Town in 1862, after which the game spread rapidly throughout the continent, particularly in the British colonies and in societies with vibrant indigenous athletic traditions.

During the interwar period, African men in cities and towns, railroad workers, and students organized clubs, associations, and regional competitions. Teams from Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia competed in the North African championship, established in 1919, and vied for the North African Cup, introduced in 1930. South of the Sahara, Kenya and Uganda first played for the Gossage Trophy in 1924, and the Darugar Cup was established on the island of Zanzibar. In the mining center of Élisabethville (now Lubumbashi, Congo) a football league for Africans was begun in 1925. In South Africa the game was very popular by the early 1930s, though it was organized in racially segregated national associations for whites, Africans, Coloureds (persons of mixed race), and Indians. In the colonies of British West Africa, the Gold Coast (now Ghana) launched its first football association in 1922, with Nigeria’s southern capital of Lagos following suit in 1931. Enterprising clubs and leagues developed across French West Africa in the 1930s, especially in Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire. Moroccan forward Larbi Ben Barek became the first African professional in Europe, playing for Olympique de Marseille and the French national team in 1938.

After World War II football in Africa experienced dramatic expansion. Modernizing colonial regimes provided new facilities and created attractive competitions, such as the French West Africa Cup in 1947. The migration of talented Africans to European clubs intensified. Together with his elder compatriot Mario Coluña, Mozambican sensation Eusébio, European player of the year in 1965, starred for European champions Benfica of Lisbon and led Portugal to third place in the 1966 World Cup, where he was the tournament’s leading scorer. Algerian stars Rachid Mekhloufi of Saint-Étienne and Mustafa Zitouni of AS Monaco represented France before joining the team of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) in 1958. The FLN eleven, who lost only 4 of 58 matches during the period 1958–62, embodied the close relations between nationalist movements and football in Africa on the eve of decolonization.

With colonialism’s hold on Africa slipping away, the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF) was established in February 1957 in Khartoum, Sudan, with the first African Cup of Nations tournament also played at that time. Independent African states encouraged football as a means of forging a national identity and generating international recognition.

In the 1960s and early ’70s, African football earned a reputation for a spectacular, attacking style of play. African and European coaches emphasized craft, creativity, and fitness within solid but flexible tactical schemes. Salif Keita (Mali), Laurent Pokou (Côte d’Ivoire), and François M’Pelé (Congo [Brazzaville]) personified the dynamic qualities of football in postcolonial Africa.

In the late 1970s, the migration of talented players overseas began hampering domestic leagues. The effects of this player exodus were somewhat tempered by the rise of “scientific football” and defensive, risk-averting tactics, an international trend that saw African players fall out of favor with European clubs. Even so, the integration of Africa and Africans into world football accelerated in the 1980s and ’90s. Cameroon’s national team, known as the Indomitable Lions, was a driving force in this process. After being eliminated without losing a match at the 1982 World Cup in Spain (tied with Italy in its group, Cameroon lost the tiebreaker on the basis of total goals scored), Cameroon reached the quarterfinals at the 1990 World Cup in Italy, thereby catapulting African football into the global spotlight. Nigeria then captured the Olympic gold medal in men’s football at the Summer Games in Atlanta in 1996; in 2000 Cameroon won its first Olympic gold medal in men’s football at the Games in Sydney, Australia. Success also came at youth level as Nigeria (1985) and Ghana (1991 and 1995) claimed under-17 world titles. Moreover, Liberian striker George Weah of Paris St. Germain received the prestigious FIFA World Player of the Year award in 1995.

Michael Essien
Michael EssienMichael Essien of Ghana jumping high for a header during a FIFA World Cup match against the United States in Nürnberg, Germany, on June 22, 2006.
In recognition of African football’s success and influence, FIFA awarded Africa five places in the 32-team 1998 World Cup finals. This achievement bore witness to African football’s phenomenal passion, growth, and development. This rich and complex history is made more remarkable by the continent’s struggles to cope with a fragile environment, scarce material resources, political conflicts, and the unpleasant legacy of imperialism.

Peter Christopher Alegi
Asia and Oceania
Football quickly entered Asia and Oceania in the latter half of the 19th century, but, unlike in Europe, it failed to become a unifying national sport. In Australia it could not dislodge the winter games of Australian rules football (codified before soccer) and rugby. British immigrants to Australia did relatively little to develop football locally. Because southern European immigrants were more committed to founding clubs and tournaments, football became defined as an “ethnic game.” As a result, teams from Melbourne and Sydney with distinctive Mediterranean connections were the most prominent members of the National Soccer League (NSL) when it started in 1977. The league has widened its scope, however, to include a highly successful Perth side, plus a Brisbane club and even one from Auckland, New Zealand. The NSL collapsed in 2004, but a new league, known as the A-League, emerged the next year.

In New Zealand, Scottish players established clubs and tournaments from the 1880s, but rugby became the national passion. In Asia, during the same germinal period, British traders, engineers, and teachers set up football clubs in such colonial outposts as Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Burma (Myanmar). Yet football’s major problem across Asia, until the 1980s, was its failure to establish substantial roots among indigenous peoples beyond college students returning from Europe. Football in India was particularly prominent in Calcutta (Kolkata) among British soldiers, but locals soon adopted cricket. In Japan, Yokohama and Kobe housed large numbers of football-playing foreigners, but local people retained preferences for the traditional sport of sumo wrestling and the imported game of baseball.

At the turn of the 21st century, football became increasingly important in Asian societies. In Iran, national team football matches became opportunities for many to express their reformist political views as well as for broad public celebration. The Iraqi men’s team’s fourth-place finish at the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens struck a chord of hope for their war-torn homeland.

The Asian game is organized by the Asian Football Confederation, comprising 47 members and stretching geographically from Lebanon in the Middle East to Guam in the western Pacific Ocean. The Asian Cup for national teams has been held quadrennially since 1956; Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Japan have dominated, with South Korea a regular runner-up. These countries have also produced the most frequent winners of the annual Asian Club Championship, first contested in 1967.

Asian economic growth during the 1980s and early 1990s and greater cultural ties to the West helped cultivate club football. Japan’s J-League was launched in 1993, attracting strong public interest and a sprinkling of famous foreign players and coaches (notably from South America). Attendance and revenue declined from 1995, but the league survived and was reorganized into two divisions of 16 and 10 clubs, respectively, by 1999. The league grew to 30 teams by 2005 but had reduced to 18 by 2018. In 2024 there were 20 J-League teams.

Some memorable international moments have indicated the potential of football in Asia and Oceania. Asia’s first notable success was North Korea’s stunning defeat of Italy at the 1966 World Cup finals. In 1994 Saudi Arabia became the first Asian team to qualify for the World Cup’s second round. The entertaining 2002 World Cup hosted by Japan and South Korea and the on-field success of the host nations’ national teams (South Korea reached the semifinals; Japan reached the second round) stood as the region’s brightest accomplishment in international football.

Sawa Homare
Sawa HomareSawa Homare of INAC Kobe Leonessa in action during the Nadeshiko League football (soccer) match between INAC Kobe Leonessa and JEF United Ichihara Chiba Ladies at Home's Stadium Kobe in Kobe, Japan, July 24, 2011.
Football’s future in Asia and Oceania depends largely upon regular competition with top international teams and players. Increased representation in the World Cup finals has helped development of the sport in the region. Meanwhile, domestic club competitions across Asia and Oceania have been weakened by the need for top national players to join better clubs in Europe or South America to test and improve their talents at a markedly higher level. Qatar hosted the 2022 World Cup,
Richard C. Giulianotti
Play of the game
The rules of football regarding equipment, field of play, conduct of participants, and settling of results are built around 17 laws. The International Football Association Board (IFAB), consisting of delegates from FIFA and the four football associations from the United Kingdom, is empowered to amend the laws. Modifications to the laws regarding the size of the field, ball, and goal, as well as the duration of the game, the use of return substitutes, and the use of temporary dismissals may be made for youth, senior, and disabled players and in grassroots or amateur football.

Equipment and field of play
football (soccer) field
1 of 2
football (soccer) fieldA professional football (soccer) pitch with measurements of the respective zones. The length of the sides of the field may vary, but other measurements are fixed.
The chemistry behind a World Cup soccer ball2 of 2
The chemistry behind a World Cup soccer ballExplore the chemistry of the football (soccer ball) used in the 2014 World Cup.
See all videos for this article
The object of football is to maneuver the ball into the opposing team’s goal, using any part of the body except the hands and arms. The side scoring more goals wins. The ball is spherical, covered with leather or some other suitable material, and inflated to a pressure equal to 0.6–1.1 atmospheres (8.5–15.6 pounds per square inch [600–1,100 grams per square cm]) at sea level; it must be 27–28 inches (68–70 cm) in circumference and 14–16 ounces (410–450 grams) in weight. A game lasts 90 minutes and is divided into two halves; the halftime interval lasts as long as 15 minutes, during which the teams change ends of the field. Additional time may be added to each half by the referee to compensate for stoppages in play (for example, player injuries). If neither side wins, and if a victor must be established, two equal periods of extra time as long as 15 minutes are played, and then, if a winner is still not established, a series of penalty kicks (shoot-out) may be taken.

The playing field (pitch) should be 100–130 yards (90–120 meters) long and 50–100 yards (45–90 meters) wide; for international matches, it must be 110–120 yards (100–110 meters) long and 70–80 yards (64–75 meters) wide. A goal is located at the center of each short side of the field, set so that each of its vertical posts is the same distance from its respective corner of the field. The goal is a three-sided frame typically backed by a net and measuring 8 yards (7.3 meters) wide and 8 feet (2.4 meters) high. The penalty area, the large rectangular area in front of the goal in which the goalkeeper is allowed to use hands and arms to handle the ball, is 44 yards (40.2 meters) wide and extends 18 yards (16.5 meters) into the field. Inside this box 12 yards (11 meters) from the midpoint of the goal is a penalty mark. The smaller rectangle within the penalty area is the goal area, which measures 20 yards (18.3 meters) wide and 6 yards (5.5 meters) long. The game is controlled by a referee, who is also the timekeeper, and two assistants who patrol the touchlines, or sidelines, signaling when the ball goes out of play and when players are offside.

Players wear jerseys with numbers, shorts, and socks that designate the team for whom they are playing. Shoes and shin guards must be worn. The two teams must wear identifiably different uniforms, and goalkeepers must be distinguishable from all players and match officials.

Fouls
Penalty kick
Penalty kickFootball player preparing to take a free kick.
Free kicks are awarded for fouls or violations of rules; when a free kick is taken, all players of the offending side must be at least 10 yards (9.15 meters) from the ball. Free kicks may be either direct (from which a goal may be scored), for more serious fouls, or indirect (from which a goal cannot be scored), for lesser violations. Penalty kicks, introduced in 1891, are awarded for more serious fouls committed inside the area. The penalty kick is a direct free kick awarded to the attacking side and is taken from a spot 12 yards (11 meters) from goal, with all players other than the defending goalkeeper and the kicker outside the penalty area. Since 1970, players guilty of a serious foul are given a yellow caution card; a second caution earns a red card and ejection from the game. Players may also be sent off directly for particularly serious fouls, such as violent conduct.

Rules
There were few major alterations to football’s laws through the 20th century. Indeed, until the changes of the 1990s, the most significant amendment to the rules came in 1925, when the offside rule was rewritten. Previously, an attacking player (i.e., one in the opponent’s half of the playing field) was offside if, when the ball was “played” to him, fewer than three opposing players were between him and the goal. The rule change, which reduced the required number of intervening players to two, was effective in promoting more goals. In response, new defensive tactics and team formations emerged. Player substitutions were introduced in 1965; teams have been allowed to field three substitutes since 1995.

More recent rule changes have helped increase the tempo, attacking incidents, and amount of effective play in games. The pass-back rule now prohibits goalkeepers from handling the ball after it is kicked to them by a teammate. “Professional fouls,” which are deliberately committed to prevent opponents from scoring, are punished by red cards, as is tackling (taking the ball away from a player by kicking or stopping it with one’s feet) from behind. Players are cautioned for “diving” (feigning being fouled) to win free kicks or penalties. Time wasting has been addressed by forcing goalkeepers to clear the ball from hand within six seconds and by having injured players removed by stretcher from the pitch. Finally, the offside rule was adjusted to allow attackers who are level with the penultimate defender to be onside.

Interpretation of football’s rules is influenced heavily by cultural and tournament contexts. Lifting one’s feet over waist level to play the ball is less likely to be penalized as dangerous play in Britain than in southern Europe. The British game can be similarly lenient in punishing the tackle from behind, in contrast to the trend in recent World Cup matches. The use of video assisted referees (VAR) remains limited in football and is permitted only in cases in which the organizer of the event has received written permission from FIFA and has fulfilled all of the requirements FIFA sets out in its Implementation Assistance and Approval Programme. In cases in which permission is given, video assistance is allowable only in cases of obvious error in situations concerning goals, penalties, direct red cards, or the wrong player being reprimanded by the referee. The IFAB’s VAR protocol highlights that the referee’s decision is final, per the laws of the game, and it discourages breaking the flow of games to allow for video assessment on marginal decisions.

Strategy and tactics
2010 FIFA World Cup tournamentSouth Africa's football (soccer) team, Bafana Bafana (in yellow), playing Mexico during the FIFA World Cup tournament in Johannesburg on June 11, 2010.
Use of the feet and (to a lesser extent) the legs to control and pass the ball is football’s most basic skill. Heading the ball is particularly prominent when receiving long aerial passes. Since the game’s origins, players have displayed their individual skills by going on “solo runs” or dribbling the ball past outwitted opponents. But football is essentially a team game based on passing between team members. The basic playing styles and skills of individual players reflect their respective playing positions. Goalkeepers require agility and height to reach and block the ball when opponents shoot at goal. Central defenders have to challenge the direct attacking play of opponents; called upon to win tackles and to head the ball away from danger such as when defending corner kicks, they are usually big and strong. Fullbacks are typically smaller but quicker, qualities required to match speedy wing-forwards. Midfield players (also called halfs or halfbacks) operate across the middle of the field and may have a range of qualities: powerful “ball-winners” need to be “good in the tackle” in terms of winning or protecting the ball and energetic runners; creative “playmakers” develop scoring chances through their talent at holding the ball and through accurate passing. Wingers tend to have good speed, some dribbling skills, and the ability to make crossing passes that travel across the front of goal and provide scoring opportunities for forwards. Forwards can be powerful in the air or small and penetrative with quick footwork; essentially, they should be adept at scoring goals from any angle.

Tactics reflect the importance of planning for matches. Tactics create a playing system that links a team’s formation to a particular style of play (such as attacking or counterattacking, slow or quick tempo, short or long passing, teamwork or individualistic play). Team formations do not count the goalkeeper and enumerate the deployment of players by position, listing defenders first, then midfielders, and finally attackers (for example, 4-4-2 or 2-3-5). The earliest teams played in attack-oriented formations (such as 1-1-8 or 1-2-7) with strong emphasis on individual dribbling skills. In the late 19th century, the Scots introduced the passing game, and Preston North End created the more cautious 2-3-5 system. Although the English were associated with a cruder kick-and-rush style, teamwork and deliberate passing were evidently the more farsighted aspects of an effective playing system as playing skills and tactical acumen increased.

Between the wars, Herbert Chapman, the astute manager of London’s Arsenal club, created the WM formation, featuring five defenders and five attackers: three backs and two halves in defensive roles, and two inside forwards assisting the three attacking forwards. Chapman’s system withdrew the midfield center-half into defense in response to the 1925 offside rule change and often involved effective counterattacking, which exploited the creative genius of withdrawn forward Alex James as well as Cliff Bastin’s goal-scoring prowess. Some teams outside Britain also withdrew their center-half, but others (such as Italy at the 1934 World Cup, and many South American sides) retained the original 2-3-5 formation. By the outbreak of World War II, many clubs, countries, and regions had developed distinctive playing styles—such as the powerful combative play of the English, the technical short-passing skills of the Danubian School, and the artistry and dribbling of Argentines.

After the war, numerous tactical variations arose. Hungary introduced the deep-lying center-forward to confuse opposing defenders, who could not decide whether to mark the player in midfield or let him roam freely behind the forwards. The complex Swiss verrou system, perfected by Karl Rappan, saw players switch positions and duties depending on the game’s pattern. It was the first system to play four players in defense and to use one of them as a “security bolt” behind the other three. Counterattacking football was adopted by top Italian clubs, notably Internazionale of Milan. Subsequently, the catenaccio system developed by Helenio Herrera at Internazionale copied the verrou system, playing a libero (free man) in defense. The system was highly effective but made for highly tactical football centered on defense that was often tedious to watch.

Several factors contributed to the generation of more defensive, negative playing styles and team formations. With improved fitness training, players showed more speed and stamina, reducing the time and space for opponents to operate. The rules of football competitions (such as European club tournaments) often have encouraged visiting teams to play for draws, while teams playing at home are very wary of conceding goals. Local and national pressures not to lose matches have been intense, and many coaches discourage players from taking risks.

As football’s playing systems became more rationalized, players were no longer expected to stay in set positions but to be more adaptable. The major victim was the wing-forward, the creator of attacking openings, whose defensive limitations were often exposed. Internationally, Brazil became the greatest symbol of individualistic, flowing football. Brazil borrowed the 4-2-4 formation founded in Uruguay to win the 1958 World Cup; the tournament was widely televised, thus helping Brazil’s highly skilled players capture the world’s imagination. For the 1962 tournament in Chile, Brazil triumphed again, withdrawing one winger into midfield to create 4-3-3. England’s “Wingless Wonders” won the 1966 tournament with a more cautious variant of 4-3-3 that was really 4-4-2, employing no real wingers and a set of players more suited to work than creative passing or dribbling skills.

Johan Cruyff
Johan CruyffJohan Cruyff playing in the New York Cosmos versus World All-Stars match in East Rutherford, New Jersey, on August 30, 1978.
In the early 1970s, the Dutch “total football” system employed players with all-around skills to perform both defensive and attacking duties but with more aesthetically pleasing consequences. Players such as Johan Cruyff and Johan Neeskens provided the perfect outlets for this highly fluent and intelligent playing system. Holland’s leading club—Ajax of Amsterdam—helped direct total football into a 3-4-3 system; Ajax’s long-term success was also built upon one of the world’s leading scouting and coaching systems, creating a veritable conveyor belt of educated, versatile players. However, hustling playing styles built around the now classic 4-4-2 formation have been especially prominent in Europe, notably as a result of the successes of English clubs in European competition from the mid-1970s to mid-1980s. The great Milan team of the late 1980s recruited the talented Dutch triumvirate of Ruud Gullit, Frank Rijkaard, and Marco van Basten, but their national and European success was founded too upon a “pressing” system in which opponents were challenged relentlessly for every loose ball.

The move toward efficient playing systems such as 4-4-2 saw changes in defensive tactics. Zonal defending, based on controlling specific spaces, became more prominent. Conversely, the classic catenaccio system had enabled greater man-to-man marking of forwards by defenders, with the libero providing backup when required. Subsequently, some European clubs introduced 3-5-2 formations using wingbacks (a hybrid of fullback and attacking winger) on either side of the midfield. Players such as Roberto Carlos of Real Madrid and Brazil were outstanding exponents of this new role.

After 1990, as media coverage of football increased in Europe and South America and as the game enjoyed a rise in popularity, playing systems underwent closer analysis. They are now often presented in strings of four: 1-3-4-2 features a libero, three defenders, four midfielders and two forwards; 4-4-1-1 calls for four defenders, four midfielders, and a split strike force with one forward playing behind the other. The different roles and playing spaces of midfield players have become more obvious: for example, the four-player midfield diamond shape has one player in an attacking role, two playing across the center, and one playing a holding role in front of the defenders.

Differences in playing systems between Latin American and European teams have declined markedly. During the 1960s and ’70s, Brazilian and Argentinian teams went through “modernizing” phases in which the European values of efficiency, physical strength, and professionalism were promoted in place of more traditional local styles that emphasized greater individualism and display of technical skills. South American national teams are now very likely to be composed entirely of players who perform for European clubs and to play familiar 3-5-2 or 4-4-2 systems.

For all these tactical developments, football’s finest players and greatest icons remain the brilliant individualists: the gifted midfield playmakers, the dazzling wingers, or the second forwards linking the midfield to the principal attacker. Some leading postwar exponents have included Pelé, Rivaldo, Ronaldo, and Marta (Brazil); Diego Maradona and Lionel Messi (Argentina); Roberto Baggio and Francesco Totti (Italy); Michel Platini and Zinedine Zidane (France); George Best (Northern Ireland); Stanley Matthews, Paul Gascoigne, and Kelly Smith (England); Ryan Giggs (Wales); Luis Figo, Eusébio, and Cristiano Ronaldo (Portugal); Jim Baxter and Derek Johnstone (Scotland); Birgit Prinz (Germany); Alexia Putellas (Spain); Sawa Homare (Japan); Christine Sinclair (Canada); Sun Wen (China); and Carli Lloyd, Michelle Akers, Abby Wambach, Megan Rapinoe, and Mia Hamm (United States).

FIFA men’s World Cup winners
Winners of the FIFA men’s World Cup are provided in the table.

World Cup, in football (soccer), quadrennial tournament of men’s national teams that determines the sport’s world champion. It is likely the most popular sporting event in the world, drawing billions of television viewers every tournament. Countries worldwide compete vigorously, many years in advance, to host the lucrative event, and accusations of bribery connected to the awarding of hosting rights have long shadowed the tournament. In fact, the 2015 FIFA corruption scandal implicated more than two dozen FIFA officials and their associates in a 24-year self-enrichment scheme that reached the highest levels of FIFA management. The equivalent tournament for women’s national football teams is the Women’s World Cup.

The history behind the FIFA World Cup1 of 3
The history behind the FIFA World CupWatch this video to learn more about the history of the FIFA World Cup.
See all videos for this article1930 World Cup

1930 World CupUruguay scoring its first goal in the World Cup final against Argentina, in Montevideo, Uruguay, July 30, 1930.
Explore which countries won the most men's World Cup titles over time3 of 3
Explore which countries won the most men's World Cup titles over timeLearn more about which countries have won the most men's World Cup titles since 1930.
See all videos for this article
The first competition for the cup was organized in 1930 by the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) and was won by Uruguay. Held every four years since that time, except during World War II, the competition consists of international sectional tournaments leading to a final elimination event made up of 32 national teams. Unlike Olympic football, World Cup teams are not limited to players of a certain age or amateur status, so the competition serves more nearly as a contest between the world’s best players. Referees are selected from lists that are submitted by all the national associations.

The trophy cup awarded from 1930 to 1970 was the Jules Rimet Trophy, named for the Frenchman who proposed the tournament. This cup was permanently awarded in 1970 to then three-time winner Brazil (1958, 1962, and 1970), and a new trophy called the FIFA World Cup was put up for competition. Many other sports have organized “World Cup” competitions.

Star making not star taking’: how LA Galaxy rose back to top of US soccer
Years after Beckham-mania, fan activism and changes in recruitment strategy secured club’s first MLS Cup since 2014


When the Major League Soccer champions were crowned last December, Lionel Messi was not on the podium. He, Luis Suárez, Sergio Busquets and the rest of the Inter Miami galácticos had been dispatched in the playoffs. Instead, the new kings of US football were the old aristocrats of LA Galaxy, back on top after a 10-year absence, but without a household name in their ranks.

The team that brought you Beckham-mania, staged the Captain America show and gave a number of people Zlatan-itis had retaken the summit of the US club game with a roster of unheralded talent. But the twist was more profound than that: this 180-degree turn on strategy was brought about by fan activism, after supporters went on strike to force the club to change their approach.

“We had a period where we struggled a bit,” says Tom Braun, the Galaxy president of business operations, whose job it was to take fans’ frustrations on board. “After a decade, I think our fans got a little … they pushed us in a good way. They pushed us to be better.”

Inter Miami forward Lionel Messi, left, dribbles past Atlanta United defender Derrick Williams, right, before scoring in the first half. 
MLS talking points: How Lionel Messi got revenge while Diego Luna got noticed
Read more
Braun was promoted into his role two years ago after a period of remarkable upheaval at Galaxy. In 2022 the then president, Chris Klein, had been suspended by MLS for breaching salary guidelines, seemingly in order to squeeze more star names into his squad. Galaxy’s response was to renew his contract and what had been a protest, including the time-honoured activity of trailing a banner from a plane calling for Klein’s dismissal, expanded into a fan boycott. Galaxy’s five distinct fan groups came together to insist they would not return to watch the team until “change is made at the highest level”. That season, average attendance at the Dignity Health Sports Park fell by more than 10%.

Los Angeles Galaxy forward Joseph Paintsil celebrates after scoring during the first half of the MLS Cup championship football match against the New York Red Bulls.
View image in fullscreen
Joseph Paintsil, who has made a huge impact at LA Galaxy, holds aloft the shirt of Riqui Puig, who is out with an ACL injury. Photograph: Étienne Laurent/AP
With dwindling support and the team at the bottom of MLS’s Western Conference, Klein was dismissed in May 2023. Braun then stepped into the front office and sought to re-establish relations with supporters. The strategy was known as “fight for the fan” and the fight was necessary. But the route to winning back trust was not paved with big announcements, Braun argues, but a concentration on the small things.

“We created a fan council, which is roughly 17 people, from season-ticket members to single-game buyers, to people that might have different accessibility needs to get their vision,” Braun says. “They wanted to create a better fan experience across the board. So we enhanced [the pre-match entertainment offering] Soccer Fest. We’ve brought in DJs. We’ve increased ingress so you get in better and faster. We changed out all the seats in our stadium. We improved restrooms, which isn’t always the fun thing to talk about but it was important to our fans. So we heard them and we made those changes.”

The changes were made, and the fans came back. Ticket revenues rose by 38% on the previous season, but more importantly the returning support created an indomitable atmosphere inside the ground. Galaxy went unbeaten at home in the regular season in 2024, with 13 wins and three draws.

Fans also identified with a team that had moved away from star names. In 2023 Galaxy’s three designated players were the one-time Manchester United striker Javier Hernández, the former Bayern Munich winger Douglas Costa and the Barcelona youth graduate Riqui Puig. In 2024 Hernández and Costa were moved on and Puig was joined by the more unheralded prospects Joseph Paintsil and Gabriel Pec. “We had a history of signing recognisable big-name talent,” Braun says. “Now, while we still have that in players like Marco Reus, we’ve also signed younger players that are proving to be talented. Right now, the Galaxy is in the business of star making, not star taking.”

Galaxy are hardly the only MLS club to have re-evaluated their recruitment strategy. The average age of players in MLS fell for the second consecutive year to 26.13 in 2024, when 150 players aged 22 or younger made at least one appearance. The trend for greater youth emulates the direction of travel in Europe and Braun says it is a sign of MLS’s maturity.


Jonathan Wilson brings expert analysis on the biggest stories from European soccer
Privacy Notice: Newsletters may contain info about charities, online ads, and content funded by outside parties. For more information see our Privacy Policy. We use Google reCaptcha to protect our website and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
after newsletter promotion
Marco Reus of the LA Galaxy makes a goal attempt during their regular season MLS game against the St Louis City SC.
View image in fullscreen
Marco Reus signed for La Galaxy in August last year and is one of the few well-known names in the side. Photograph: Ariana Ruiz/PI/ZUMA Press Wire/Shutterstock
“The league is only 30 years old and a lot of the time has been spent in educating our fans on what it’s about,” he says. “I think we’re moving past that now. I think we’re showing that this is a really competitive league. I think that’s been a challenge for soccer in the US in the past, but MLS has really grown in a meaningful way. Going into 2026 and the World Cup, it’s just going to continue to elevate what we’re doing. I think more players are going to continue to choose our league. I think the level of players is going to continue to rise and the engagement with our fanbase is going to continue to get lifted.”

Unlike Messi’s Miami, Galaxy did not receive an invite to this summer’s expanded Fifa Club World Cup. “I think for winning our domestic championship, it would have been nice,” Braun says, though he backs the competition and, particularly, the opportunity to have more competitive fixtures against overseas clubs. “Any time you can compete against teams from different nations teams is a great opportunity,” he says, “but it’s important for your team to show success and win these trophies.”

Galaxy may have dialled down the big names, and turned up the customer service, but Braun says the club’s core identity remains the same: it’s about winning.

“We identify as being a very successful club and winning as a club in our league,” he says. “We signed big players with big names that helped us to get to this point. But the LA Galaxy is known to be a very important brand in soccer and a successful brand in soccer. We’re continuing to find ways to build upon that by winning.”

The USMNT is soft. Can Mauricio Pochettino toughen them up before the 2026 World Cup?
Updated Mar. 21, 2025 6:50 p.m. GMT-4
share

The United States loses a game they should have won, and we have this introspective type of moment. Where is the grit? Where is the pride? — or all the different words that we use.

This time, it was a 1-0 loss to Panama in the Concacaf Nations League semifinals, one of the scarce opportunities the U.S. and, namely, Mauricio Pochettino had to prove themselves in a competitive setting. Instead, this U.S. team came out and fell flat on their face.

There are two ways that you can look at this: You can take the long approach and say nothing really matters until the summer of 2026 and that the sky is not falling.

Or, you can look at it and say: This is unacceptable. This was a lackluster performance. This was a performance devoid of any emotion, any passion, determination and any direction. It was rudderless from top to bottom.

It wasn't just the score, either; it was also the individual performances. This is on the players, and this is on Pochettino.

Pochettino was hired to draw that toughness out of this group, and he's being paid a hell-of-a-lot of money to do it. And, by the way, he's an Argentine, so he knows from being a part of that culture — as a player and a manager — that there's a level of nastiness that even the best teams in the world play with, including Argentina. Even with the wonderful soccer that they play, they match it with ruthlessness and a nastiness.

In our effort to create better soccer players — and I'm trying so hard not to call them spoiled, coddled, tattooed millionaires — the old guy in me wants to line them up on the wall and scream at them and say "What is your problem?" You've been given absolutely everything, and at the very least, we should see some fight. At the very least, we should see your blood boiling at the opportunity to represent the greatest country in the world, and we didn't see that tonight.


You might ask: How does that toughness translate to results on the field? And to that I say, it's like the Supreme Court's definition of obscenity: I can't tell you what it is, but I know it when I see it. We saw it in the U.S. in the Gold Cup final against Mexico in 2021 — there was a difference in that team in Denver.

At the same time, we often do this thing with this group where we ask: Does it matter to them? Do they even care?

I think they care — if they don't care, we might as well just pack it up and give your place to someone else in 2026.

Gold Cup is coming and, obviously, the third-place match on Sunday against a very good Canadian team. And don't think for a second that Jesse Marsch isn't going to want an opportunity to win. It's a third-place game, but there's much more meaning than there would be in normal circumstances.

My fear is this: the U.S. comes back a couple of days from now and puts in a really good performance and beats Canada, and we all sit around and go, "Hey, that was wonderful!" But why do they need a loss against Panama to come back and do that? Can you manufacture that motivation for yourself without having to go through a failure of performances the likes of which we saw?

When 2026 rolls around, you can't afford to just give away one of those games, and when you're not motivated when it comes to a World Cup, or a Gold Cup, or a Nations League, you have problems, and Mauricio Pochettino recognizes he has problems on his hands.

Is the sky falling? No, but that was not good enough and Pochettino’s job is to make us believe that something different is there, that something new is there, that we’re going to see something that we haven’t seen before.

Guess what my friends? We’ve seen that before, and we do not want to see that again.

Alexi Lalas is a soccer analyst for FOX Sports and host of "Alexi Lalas' State of the Union Podcast." He represented the USMNT at the 1994 FIFA World Cup and had a nine-year professional career. In 2006, he became the president of the LA Galaxy and helped bring David Beckham to Major League Soccer.

Tyler Adams, Gio Reyna highlight USMNT roster for Nations League finals
Tyler Adams and Gio Reyna will participate in their first U.S. national team camp under Mauricio Pochettiino as  the coach named the 2022 World Cup veterans to his 23-man roster for next week's Concacaf Nations League finals in Los Angeles.

Usual USMNT headliners Christian Pulisic, Weston McKennie and Tim Weah were also included alongside Adams and Reyna, who were injured for Pochettino's first two camps after the former Chelsea, Paris Saint-Germain and Tottenham manager was hired last September. The Americans will face Panama in next Thursday's semifinal at SoFi Stadium, with the winner advancing to the March 23rd final there against either Canada or Mexico.

The U.S. is looking to add a fourth consecutive Nations League title after lifting the trophy in 2021, 2023 and last year.

"This is a massive opportunity to win a trophy and that is our clear objective," Pochettino said in a press release. "We must continue to show our quality, our bravery and our commitment to each other. We have an important moment to represent our country and our supporters, and we are very excited for this opportunity." 

Here's the full roster, followed by three quick thoughts and quotes from Pochettino's Monday afternoon conference call with reporters. 

Goalkeepers: Patrick Schulte, Columbus Crew (MLS); Zack Steffen, Colorado Rapids (MLS); Matt Turner, Crystal Palace (England)

Defenders: Cameron Carter-Vickers, Celtic (Scotland); Marlon Fossey, Standard Liege (Belgium); Mark McKenzie, Toulouse (France); Tim Ream, Charlotte FC (MLS); Chris Richards, Crystal Palace ; Antonee "Jedi" Robinson, Fulham (England); Miles Robinson, Cincinnati (MLS); Joe Scally, Borussia Mönchengladbach (Germany); Auston Trusty, Celtic

Midfiedlers: Tyler Adams, Bournemouth (England); Johnny Cardoso, Real Betis (Spain); Diego Luna, Real Salt Lake (MLS); Weston McKennie, Juventus (Italy); Gio Reyna, Borussia Dortmund (Germany); Tanner Tessmann, Lyon (France); 

Forwards:  Patrick Agyemang, Charlotte (MLS); Yunus Musah, AC Milan (Italy); Christian Pulisic, AC Milan; Josh Sargent, Norwich City (England); Timothy Weah, Juventus; Brian White, Vancouver Whitecaps (MLS)

Reyna gets the call despite his lack of club minutes 
Adams, who scored the game-winning goal in last year's championship match versus Mexico, was a shoo-in for this squad following his return to fitness following back surgery. The American captain at Qatar 2022, Adams has been at the height of his powers for Premier League Bournemouth, which is on pace for a top-half finish this season.

"It's great to have him," Pochettino said of Adams. "In the last months he was performing really, really well with his team, Bournemouth … it's a great opportunity for us to [get to] know him."

Reyna's inclusion, meantime, wasn't necessarily a sure thing. The 22-year-old has played sparingly for Borussia Dortmund since returning from a groin strain that sidelined him for all of September and October. He's logged just 541 minutes all season and was an unused substitute in the Black & Yellow's most recent match in the Bundesliga.

But Reyna remains one of the Americans' most talented attackers, and he's owned the Nations League in years past, scoring in all three previous editions. He was named the tournament's top player last year.

"It's true that maybe he's not playing too much but I think for us, he's a great player," the coach said when FOX Sports asked about Reyna's struggles at club level. "We want to win this competition and he can help. That is why he's with us. But at the same time, I think he can do better."

There was also a practical consideration when it came to Reyna. With Dortmund scheduled to particpate in this summer's FIFA Club World Cup, Reyna won't be available to the national team for the simultaneously-staged Concacaf Gold Cup if he's still with the German titan. 

"If not, it's going to be difficult to see him," said Pochettino. "it's important to create this relationship for the future." 

Poch rewards Carter-Vickers, Trusty and January campers
After recovering from injury, central defender Cameron Carter-Vickers, who briefly played for the Argentine at Tottenham, is the only other callup who will be participating in his first camp under Pochettino. The experienced 27-year-old, another World Cup vet, helped Celtic reach the knockout stage of the Champions League, where he and fellow center back Trusty then nearly helped the Scottish side upset Bayern Munich. Those performances clearly didn't go unnoticed.

Pochettino also rewarded six members of his January camp squad with invitations this month — including Diego Luna and Brian White (who combined on the game-winning goal against Costa Rica) and Patrick Agyemang (who scored in that game and in his USMNT debut versus Venezuela).

WIth just three training sessions before the March 20 opener versus Los Canaleros, continuity is important. Everyone must be able to hit the ground running. 

"It's important for us to have players that we already know and who already have been working with us," Pochettino said. 

No room for Zendejas, Brenden Aaronson or Miles Robinson 
Aaronson has been a U.S. regular for most of the last four years. But he was among a number of regulars left off Pochettino's list this month. The others are Robinson, who had started three of the new coach's first six games at the helm, and Alex Zendejas, who has been tearing up the Mexican league with Liga MX champ Club America.

All three had a case. Ultimately, it became a numbers game — even with normal roster locks like Folarin Balogun, Sergiño Dest, Ricardo Pepi and Malik Tillman all unavailable this month because of injury or, in Dest's case, having just returned from one. 

With just 23 spots available under Concacaf rules, there was also no place for Europe-based trio Gianluca Busio, Aidan Morris or Paxten Aaronson, Brenden's younger brother.

"We're disappointed because we cannot call all [of them]," Pochettino said. "The difficulty always when you have too many players is to be right.

"It's really painful because sometimes it's not only the performance, it's the balance," he added. "We selected these 23 players because we really believe that we can find a very good balance and compete in our best way to win." 

Doug McIntyre is a soccer writer for FOX Sports who has covered the United States men's and women's national teams at FIFA World Cups on five continents. Follow him at @ByDougMcIntyre.

Panama defeat conjures memories of USMNT’s most devastating losses
Christian Pulisic in the USMNT&#039;s loss to Trinidad &amp; Tobago
By Pablo Maurer
6

March 22, 2025 1:00 pm GMT+1
The U.S. men’s national team’s 1-0 loss to Panama in the Concacaf Nations League semifinals was unquestionably a humiliating one. The USMNT, replete with stars playing abroad and coached by the reputable Mauricio Pochettino, looked listless against the Panamanians. Despite the fact that Panama has now beaten the Americans three times in the last 20 months, the result still felt like a gut-punch to the U.S. – the program and its fans.

Not that many of them watched the match in person. Just before the anthems on Thursday, U.S. star Christian Pulisic was spotted grimacing at the large swaths of empty seats around SoFi Stadium. The dour atmosphere – it didn’t help that it was a 4 p.m. local time kickoff outside Los Angeles – only added to the heartburn surrounding the result. A significantly larger crowd turned up for the second match of the day, between Mexico and Canada.

Pochettino spent much of the run-up to the game doing media, offering bold predictions that the USMNT were real contenders to win the World Cup in 2026, which is a little over a year away. In other interviews, he spoke of returning to the EPL some day and yearned for a conversation with U.S. President Donald Trump. The Argentine is charming, for certain, but his guile will mean nothing if he can’t accomplish his stated goals. He was brought in in large part to motivate this “golden generation” of U.S. players, but very few of them looked committed or golden on Thursday night.

The loss is unquestionably the poorest result of Pochettino’s seven-match tenure to date, and the U.S. still has a chance to save a bit of face against Canada in the third-place game. A loss in that match, which certainly feels possible, would only add to the misery surrounding the USMNT’s recent performances, and with time running short when it comes to galvanizing the country around the sport and program, results like Thursday’s come with some added layers.

Perspective is important, though, and even a fourth-place finish in a Concacaf Nations League wouldn’t hold a candle to some of the U.S. men’s most devastating previous failures, ones that had massive consequences. If you’re the kind of fan that likes to lean into your grief, then keep reading.

Costa Rica 1, USMNT 0; May 31, 1985
By the time the USMNT’s final qualifier of the 1986 World Cup cycle rolled around, the whole of American soccer was in a tailspin. The North American Soccer League (NASL) — the first real, top-flight league in U.S. history — had closed up shop permanently just two months earlier. The national team was largely made up of players from the Major Indoor Soccer League, and they rarely played the outdoor game, outside of national team call-ups. Some team members even played in semi-professional leagues and held part-time jobs.

Mexico, the dominant team in the region for decades, had already qualified for the 1986 World Cup as the host nation. In an era where only two teams from Concacaf qualified, the USMNT was looked upon as a favorite to advance. It needed only a draw against Costa Rica to advance to the next round of qualifying and take a step closer to a first World Cup berth since 1950.

The NASL’s collapse and public apathy toward the sport put the U.S. Soccer Federation in a bind and made ticket sales an essential revenue stream. Consequential matches in the U.S, even World Cup qualifiers, frequently felt like away games, with crowds full of immigrants from Latin American countries. Such was the case against Costa Rica.

“There was an agent that represented some of the (Costa Rican) players,” remembered USMNT’s Perry Van der Beck. “The federation sold this game to him. The stadium was just full of Costa Ricans — the halftime show, even, was just full of Costa Rican music, all aimed at the Costa Rican fans.”

The U.S. was led by head coach Alkis Panagoulias. Born in Greece, Panagoulias was a “token offering,” remembers former USMNT defender Alan Merrick, “who truly believed that the so-called ‘American spirit’ would carry us alone.” He was short of technical acumen and long on inspirational quotes.

“In this country, somewhere out there, maybe in Harlem or Los Angeles, there is the next Pelé,” Panagoulias once said. “And not just one — maybe 20 or 30.”

None of them was present against Costa Rica. The U.S. had the lion’s share of possession that day and played a bright opening half hour, yet the Costa Ricans pulled ahead on a lucky strike. USMNT forward Ricky Davis, along with fellow upstart Hugo Pérez, had a half-dozen decent chances for the U.S., all of which missed the mark.

Then, in the 73rd minute, a ray of hope: Defender Dan Canter fired in a shot that appeared to go in. The referee signaled for a goal, which was later waved off. It had hit the side netting, and 20 minutes later, the match ended. So did the U.S.’s hopes of qualification.

Play: Video

“I don’t know where we go from there,” Davis told reporters after the match. “There was our best chance to make it to the World Cup. We won’t have another chance until 1990. Who knows where soccer in America will be by then?”

The defeat is among the darkest moments in U.S. soccer history, but it also marks a beginning. Panagoulias and a host of players would be shown the door, replaced by a generation of talent that would eventually lead the U.S. to its first World Cup qualification in 40 years.

Among the only players to survive that transition was Paul Caligiuri. Not only did the USMNT legend take place in one of the program’s darkest moments, he scored the famed “shot heard ‘round the world” against Trinidad and Tobago that qualified the U.S. for the 1990 World Cup in Italy.

Iran 2, USMNT 1; June 21, 1998
The USMNT entered the 1998 World Cup in France riding a wave of hype. It followed a respectable showing at the 1994 World Cup on home soil with a series of wonderful results: a shocking run to the semifinals of the 1995 Copa America, the country’s first (and still only) victory over Brazil a few years later and a host of other respectable encounters against legitimately good teams across the globe.

Under the surface, though, cracks had begun to show. Some of the squad’s veterans, many of whom were part of the ‘94 cycle, had butted heads with head coach Steve Sampson over roster decisions and their dwindling roles. Sampson added fuel to the fire when he brought in a series of foreign-born players, much to the chagrin of the team’s veterans.

And infamously, Sampson excluded U.S. legend John Harkes from the final roster after learning that Harkes had been engaged in an affair with the wife of teammate Eric Wynalda. A difficult draw made the U.S.’s task in 1998 even more difficult, and after losing the opening match to Germany and with Yugoslavia looming, the USMNT’s second match against Iran became a must-win.

The game was framed by decades-old turmoil between Iran and the United States, and as matchday approached, things grew tense. SWAT teams and snipers were present in the stadium and FIFA had mandated strict protocols for how both teams interacted before the match. The U.S. and Iran, seeking to make a statement, took a team photograph together, with the Iranians presenting the U.S. players with white flowers.

USMNT and Iran at the 1998 World Cup
USMNT and Iran pose together at the 1998 World Cup. (Photo by Nader Davoodi ATPImages/Getty Images)
 

For his part, Sampson made a half-dozen changes to his starting XI from the Germany loss and altered his formation, as well. The U.S. started the game on the front foot, nearly pulling ahead on a Brian McBride header, which hit the post. But the Iranians were opportunistic, and they grabbed a pair of goals on the counterattack. The 2-1 loss, combined with other results, eliminated the USMNT from the World Cup after two games.

The writing was on the wall for Sampson, who’d be dismissed not long after the tournament’s conclusion. Many of the club’s senior players, most notably veteran defender Alexi Lalas, sealed Sampson’s fate by publicly criticizing him in the press. The 1998 debacle marked the end of an era for U.S. Soccer, with many of the team’s highest-profile players, those who’d taken part in the 1994 World Cup, moving on for good.

Czech Republic 3, USMNT 0; June 12, 2006
It’s nearly impossible to overstate the hype surrounding the USMNT in the run-up to the 2006 World Cup. The U.S. had shocked the world with a deep run in 2002 and stormed through qualifying for the ‘06 tournament, booking a ticket to Germany with three matches remaining. The U.S. roster was a who’s who of American soccer royalty, maybe the most talented collection of American players ever sent to a World Cup.

The qualifying run had pushed the U.S. up to fifth in FIFA’s (deeply flawed) world ranking, which was uncharted territory for the lowly Americans. They’d done something even more improbable — cracked the consciousness of the general public in the U.S., the most elusive of challenges in American soccer. U.S. Soccer and Nike only intensified the buzz, plastering the team all over American airwaves and even deputizing one of the team’s young stars, Clint Dempsey, as U.S. Soccer’s official rapper.

Even a truly difficult draw couldn’t dampen the spirits of the American faithful. Italy and Ghana were both respectable opponents but both seemed beatable. Rounding out the U.S. group was the Czech Republic, then one of the best teams in the world.

Any and all hype surrounding the U.S. evaporated within moments of their group stage opener against the Czechs. It was not the first time the two countries had met in a World Cup. In 1990, the U.S. played their first World Cup match in 40 years against what was then called Czechoslovakia, losing in a 5-1 bloodbath. Many considered it a miracle the U.S. had even qualified for that tournament and few paid the result any mind. Even fewer considered it any form of a humiliation.

But 2006 was a different story. The U.S. was comprehensively dismantled by a Czech side featuring names like Jan Koller, Petr Čech and Tomáš Rosický. After their showing at the ‘02 World Cup and despite the hype surrounding the squad, the USMNT managed just one shot in the drubbing.

An Associated Press match report said the U.S. looked like “a bewildered World Cup newcomer again,” and the result in the opener proved too much to overcome. The USMNT managed just a single goal in the tournament and was sent packing — along with the Czech Republic, the other casualty of the group of death.

What You Should Read Next
How Clint Dempsey’s childhood in Nacogdoches inspired the USMNT’s 2006 hype video ‘Don’t Tread’
How Clint Dempsey’s childhood in Nacogdoches inspired the USMNT’s 2006 hype video ‘Don’t Tread’
Dempsey still has a soft spot for the song, as do many soccer fans in this country.
USMNT 1, Mexico 2; November 11, 2016
Few words in the language of American soccer carry as much weight as “dos a cero.”

The USMNT’s rivalry with Mexico is the stuff of legend, with the Mexicans holding a historical edge on their northern neighbors. Mexico was essentially unbeatable at the Azteca in Mexico City and El Tri often got the better of the U.S. in the states, as well. It wasn’t until the USMNT started playing matches of consequence against Mexico in Columbus, Ohio, that the U.S. had a true home-field advantage.

For a 15-year stretch, the U.S. were undefeated at Crew Stadium, going 8-0-3 and compiling a 6-0-2 in World Cup qualifiers at the venue. The greatest results came against Mexico. The U.S. won every match they played against the Mexicans by that 2-0, dos-a-cero scoreline during that stretch, creating a deeply important psychological edge that grew with every successive result.

By 2016, the thought that the U.S. would lose a match to Mexico in Columbus — even allow a goal there — felt borderline unthinkable. Yet something felt different ahead of the U.S.’s qualifier against the Mexicans that November, in no small part because of the presidential election only days earlier. Trump’s dangerous rhetoric about Mexican immigrants in the United States forced both teams to put sports aside for the moment. By the time the two sides posed together for a team photo as a sign of unity just before the match, the aura surrounding the match changed. By the end of the game, the mystique of Crew Stadium was gone.

Mexico's Rafa Marquez and Miguel Layun
Rafa Márquez gave Mexico its first World Cup qualifying win in Columbus in 2016. (Paul Vernon/AFP/Getty Images)
Mexican defender Miguel Layún gave El Tri their first goal in Columbus 20 minutes in before the U.S. equalized early in the second half through Bobby Wood. Mexico did not let up, though, and found the winner just a minute from full time. It came courtesy of a glancing header by Rafa Márquez, perhaps the most villainous player in the history of the rivalry to U.S. fans. It felt fitting. Four days later, the U.S. lost 4-0 in Costa Rica, and five days after that, manager Jurgen Klinsmann was fired, with qualification for the 2018 World Cup put in peril.

By the time the 2022 qualification cycle rolled around, Crew Stadium had been replaced with a gleaming new venue. It probably wouldn’t have mattered anyways — the USMNT chose to play their home qualifier against Mexico in Cincinnati instead, leaving Columbus and all of its accompanying magic in the rearview.

Trinidad and Tobago 2, USMNT 1; October 10, 2017
Few U.S. fans had heard of Couva (population 45,000) before the USMNT played a decisive World Cup qualifier there in the fall of 2017. Now, the little town in Trinidad is seared into the collective consciousness of every USMNT fan. The name alone is a trigger word.

It was there that a shocking result eliminated the U.S. from qualification for the 2018 World Cup, ending a stretch during which the U.S. had played in every World Cup since 1990.

The seeds of the defeat in Couva were planted by Klinsmann, who led the USMNT through a miserable qualification cycle. After losing to Mexico and Costa Rica in the opening matches of the final stage of qualification, Klinsmann was sacked and replaced by Bruce Arena.

Arena, by most metrics the most successful coach in USMNT history, set about trying to repair the damage. The U.S. breezed through a few games but stuttered late in the qualification cycle. Even still, it seemed in excellent shape entering the match in Couva, needing just a draw to book a trip to Russia.

Trinidad and Tobago entered the match with little to play for, having already been eliminated. But games between these two opponents are always tinged with that famous 1989 win, the one where Caligiuri put a dagger in the heart of the Caribbean nation. The U.S. did little to help its cause by posting video on social media of the field conditions in Trinidad, a jab many viewed as belittling and insensitive given the resources available to the tiny nation.

In turn, the Soca Warriors came to play. They scored first through an own goal by U.S. defender Omar Gonzalez. Things went from bad to worse after T&T right back Alvin Jones ripped a 35-yard curler by U.S. goalkeeper Tim Howard. Pulisic, then 19, handed his team a lifeline with a goal early in the second half, but the U.S. never found an equalizer. Dempsey, reduced to a substitute, hit the post on the closest call.

Elsewhere in the region, other teams had pulled off their own upsets. Panama and Honduras had beaten Costa Rica and Mexico, respectively. and earned the right to advance. The unthinkable, to many, had happened: the USMNT was eliminated. To this day, the loss remains the worst loss in USMNT history, based on ELO rating.

Arena resigned almost immediately. USMNT fans, who had long grown accustomed to qualifying in every World Cup cycle, called for widespread change. The match marked the end of the line for a generation of U.S. legends — Michael Bradley, Dempsey, Howard and Jozy Altidore among them – and ushered in the new.

Features, The Long Read
The journey of Kylian Mbappé from non-league football to a legend in waiting

Any time a new and exciting footballing wunderkind should burst onto the scene, wide-eyed and dimple-cheeked and positively emanating a raw energy that would maim a man in his mid-40s, the reaction of the watching world plays out like a matter of scientific principle. Though the laws of physics may try to tell us that for every action there is an equal and opposite reaction, they evidently fail to take into account the action that is a wunderkind’s instant emergence and the infinitely unequal reaction of their rabid audience.

With excruciating routine, the game’s most promising youngsters are hyped to within an inch of their own sanity, have built for them glorious escalators of praise that reach far higher than they could ever hope to ascend, from which most inevitably fall, fatally, only to be revived years later by the very same writers who wish to pour over their tales and brazenly slap exclusively past-tense labels upon them by means of categorisation. Now they are simply a what-if, a could-have-been, or a wasn’t-it-a-terrible-shame-about.

As for best case scenarios, from time to time, the hype will not be misguided or unjustified. It will act not as an anchor but a soundtrack to a revolutionary player’s assault on the sport’s established norm. The score against which a truly once-in-a-generation athlete soars.

‘At such a tender age, and with seemingly unlimited potential,’ the latest back-page puff-piece will courteously conclude, ‘there may be no limit to what this talented teenager could achieve.’ And they do; they achieve. By the final beats of their long and illustrious careers, those fabled few look back, just as we do with them, to realise they’ve done it all.

In that way, Kylian Mbappé Lottin is no different to any player that came before him. His age is inarguably tender, his potential seemingly unlimited, and there may well be no limit to where his immeasurable talents could take him.

Except, in almost every other way imaginable — at just 19 years old but already with championship winners medals draped around his neck, assorted trophies and personal accolades littered throughout his home, and his pursed lips already an acquaintance of the World Cup trophy that so few come to know anywhere as intimately as he — Kylian Mbappé is totally unique to every player that came before him. 
So expeditious was Mbappé’s ascent that the supposed overnight successes that preceded him have since been made to look pedestrian in comparison; as though their own introductions were muddled together in fleeting patches of free time, carved out between more meaningful employment.
To put into perspective the speed of his rise to stardom, as a boy Mbappé’s footballing hero was Cristiano Ronaldo. Photographs depict the modest bedroom of a 14-year-old Mbappé, the white walls adorned with cutouts and clippings and posters galore, every one featuring the Portuguese superstar. Barely four years later, Mbappé was lining up against Ronaldo in the 2018 Champions League round of 16, poised on opposite sides as Real Madrid welcomed Paris Saint-Germain to the Santiago Bernabéu.

Such a scenario prompted the game-faced Frenchman to tell Marca in an interview: “Cristiano was my idol … I adored him when I was young but that ended.” Suddenly the two were contemporaries and gone were the days when the emerging generation would idolise players of bygone eras. Mbappé’s intentions, it seemed, were to make today’s idols yesterday’s news.

It was only as recently as 2013 that Monaco plucked Mbappé from the ranks of his humble hometown club, AS Bondy. Mbappé had played for the non-league side, in the working class suburb of northeast Paris, since the age of six. Early though his introduction to the game was, with his father, at the time the club’s long-serving coach, a pint-sized Mbappé wasn’t so much discovered as simply untethered.

With a football coach for a father and a professional handball player for a mother, a lifetime congenitally guided by competitive sport seemed a mere formality for Mbappé. Perhaps, before he could yet walk, though, it played on his parents’ minds that their boy wouldn’t take to sports as they had; that he’d deny his athletic inheritance, that the freedom of playing and the addiction of achieving would not intoxicate him as it did them. If they were even given the time to have them at all, their fears wouldn’t live long.

 

Across the Channel, Premier League club Chelsea caught wind of the young Parisian upstart making a name for himself in a lowly French suburb. The Blues, led by their head French scout Guy Hillion, made contact with Mbappé’s family and eagerly invited their boy for a week’s trial. He’d only recently turned 11 years old.

At their Cobham training ground, Chelsea welcomed his mother, his father and his uncle Pierre, all of whom had travelled with their excited starlet. They presented the budding footballer with a club shirt emblazoned with ‘KYLIAN 10’ on its reverse. During the week, Mbappé was treated to a tour of Stamford Bridge, met by then-manager Carlo Ancelotti, as well as the team’s star striker Didier Drogba, before being handed a start in an under-12 fixture against Charlton, which his side would win 8-0. By the game’s end, Chelsea were smitten. Mbappé, however, was not.

Chelsea were the first major club to express an interest in Mbappé and their efforts made a lasting impression on the youngster. “It was a wonderful experience,” he would later tell the Daily Telegraph. “Chelsea was the first great club, the first big club, that I went to visit. So it was a real discovery for me. I was coming from my grassroots amateur club. It was a whole new world. Of course, I had an idea what a great football club was like but I was really impressed by the working culture and the mentality of wanting to be better day in, day out. I always thought, ‘I want to be there, I want to be one of those big players who is trying to give people fun out of the game.’”

It wasn’t nearly enough to convince him to move to London. Mbappé and his family were poignantly aware that this would not be the only offer they would receive and they believed France to be the best place for him.

Six months later, Mbappé was invited to the Centre Technique National Fernand Sastre, known to most as Clairefontaine. One of the foremost football development academies on the planet, Clairefontaine is famed for having honed the talents of a raft of French – and, often, non-French – internationals. Their long list of alumni features Nicolas Anelka, Louis Saha, Hatem Ben Arfa, Mehdi Benatia, Raphaël Guerreiro, Blaise Matuidi, Olivier Giroud and Thierry Henry, to name but a few.

During his three years at Clairefontaine, all the while returning home on weekends to continue playing for AS Bondy, Mbappé would receive offers from every club in France’s top tier. What’s more, Chelsea would return again and along with them came Liverpool, Manchester City and Bayern Munich, all hoping to successfully woo him or, if need be, happen by chance upon the magic utterance required to convince him to spurn their rivals and return home with them. Mbappé rejected them all.

Real Madrid also famously courted the young French forward with a developed interest. In December 2012, a call was made to Mbappé’s father inviting his son to a trial in the Spanish capital. Zinedine Zidane wished desperately to watch him play in person, they were informed.

For most players, an invitation to audition for Real Madrid would represent an incalculable sporting opportunity. For the Mbappé family, however, they had other motivations. “We did not go to Madrid to learn more about our son’s potential,” Mbappé’s father Wilfried would tell France Football, “but to please him.” With the trip to Madrid scheduled for the same week as Mbappé’s 14th birthday, the family saw the opportunity for a brief getaway, a swift Spanish sojourn, a treat for their son for all his hard work and focus, and a good excuse to meet his idol, Cristiano Ronaldo.

In Madrid, the family did just as they had intended. They met with representatives from the club, received signed shirts from and took pictures with Zidane and Ronaldo, with whom Mbappé treasured every second, and they took in the sights of the Spanish city, making the most of their week away. When the time came to return to France, they did so after confirming to Real Madrid their son’s wishes. Mbappé would not be signing with them either. Still he wished to remain in France. He had a plan.

“Ihave had a career plan since I can remember,” Mbappé revealed to former French international and fellow Clairefontaine graduate Jérôme Rothen while filming for an episode of RMC show L’After Foot in 2017. “I know what I want to do, where I want to go, and I will not let anything disturb me.”

As he spoke, with the two sat pitchside at a vacant Stade Louis II, Mbappé often gazed at the arena around him. Beside him was the pitch he’d chosen to play on; behind him the seats belonging to the fans who now were blessed to call Mbappé their own. The boy had chosen Monaco.



What happened to Yoann Gourcuff, the next Zidane?
Internationally renowned for their fruitful youth system and the transition into professionalism and seniority that it continues to provide for so many ambitious adolescents, Mbappé saw no better place on home soil than Monaco to continue his skyward journey.

Despite being tied to the club by a youth contract only, Mbappé was handed his first senior appearance by Monaco head coach Leonardo Jardim on 2 December 2015, as his side were held to a 1-1 draw at home to Caen. Few would recall the occasion as a dream debut, perhaps few would recall the occasion at all, as Mbappé arrived in the game’s 88th minute and made little impact in what was largely a forgettable fixture.

But for Mbappé this appearance, this showing of faith, affirmed his decision to join Monaco in favour of many other clubs where the bench would inevitably have remained his place of residence or where only loan moves across borders or down leagues would have afforded him the first-team experience he so desperately craved. Additionally, this cameo appearance was enough to earn the boy the record for Monaco’s youngest-ever first-team player, aged 16 years and 347 days. The club record, after 21 years in Thierry Henry’s possession, was now Mbappé’s.

Another long-standing record of Henry’s was soon to follow. In a 3-1 league victory over Troyes in February 2016, Mbappé scored his first senior goal for the club. Aged just 17 years and 62 days, the title of youngest first-team goalscorer in Monaco’s history became his too. A month later his record-breaking habits were rewarded in the form of his first senior contract.

As the two were snapped shaking hands on the deal, Vadim Vasilyev, Monaco’s CEO, told the press: “Kylian is a precocious, highly promising player, and we are convinced he will reach his full potential at Monaco.” In the remarkable season that would follow, Les Monégasques would be treated to a season-long exhibition of exactly what their precocious, highly promising player was capable of. So too would the rest of the world. Before then, however, Mbappé would compete at the 2016 UEFA European Under-19 Championships.

In host nation Germany, Mbappé’s France would be grouped with England, the Netherlands and Croatia. The only other group featured Portugal, Italy, Germany and Austria. In their tournament opener, France succumbed to England, beaten 2-1 thanks to England’s two early strikes. But in their following fixture, France dispatched Croatia with goals from Mbappé and his strike-partner and fellow Parisian, Jean-Kévin Augustin. In their final group stage game, France delivered another win, a 5-1 demolition of the Netherlands, thanks again to Mbappé and Augustin, who delivered two and three goals each, respectively.

Through to the knockout stages and directly into the semi-finals, France made light work of opponents Portugal, despite going a goal behind in just the third minute. Again Mbappé helped himself to a brace. In the tournament’s final, France faced Italy, and they triumphed with ease. A 4-0 title-winning victory staked their claim: these young Frenchmen were the finest under-19 talents Europe had to offer and it was clear to most just who was considered the jewel in that particular crown. Mbappé returned to Monaco a European champion.

 

* * *

 

In 2011, Monaco’s domestic rivals Paris-Saint Germain underwent a rapid and inescapable mutation. Engorged by the billions of riyals invested by new owners Qatar Sports Investments and new club president Nasser Al-Khelaifi, overnight PSG were transformed. What was once a club filled with upward-facing fantasists were now a bonafide domestic superpower, looking down upon their impotent competitors, all the while masterminding an ambitious offensive on the wider continent.

Mere months into the Qatari-powered-era of their relatively short existence, Paris Saint-Germain were crowned champions of France in the 2012/13 season, the first time they could call themselves such since the early 1990s. Spearheaded by new recruits Blaise Matuidi, Javier Pastore, Zlatan Ibrahimović, Ezequiel Lavezzi, Thiago Silva, Marco Verratti, Lucas Moura and so many more, PSG won the title at a canter. Just as they did the season after, the season after that, and the season after that.



Gaël Kakuta: the brightest of talents whose light never shone

Come the eve of the 2016/17 season, Les Parisiens had their sights trained on a fifth consecutive championship. Nearer and nearer, they stalked Lyon’s record of seven. Little did they know they were to be denied, and in no small part by a fellow Parisian.

For a brief period, many saw Monaco as being almost exactly that type of club too; flush, free-spending. Following their acquisition by Russian billionaire Dmitry Rybolovlev, in the same year as the capital club’s own takeover, Les Rouges et Blancs quickly came to be seen as a footballing interpretation of their very own lavish surroundings. Monaco, as a sovereign city-state, country, microstate, or any other name, was positively overflowing with affluence. Now, so too was their team.

After spending generously to assemble a star line-up, Monaco sprang from the basement of Ligue 2 into life. They were named as the country’s second best team within two years. This cash-infused modus operandi was not, however, to last. As recalled by Charlie Carmichael in These Football Times’ France magazine, “Rybolovlev had to splash out an eye-watering €2.7 billion in divorce settlements – the largest in history – to his ex-wife and, with that, his short-lived spending policies began to dwindle.

‘There are two ways to go,’ Vadim Vasilyev, Monaco vice-president and Rybolovlev’s right-hand man, said. ‘One is either you invest a lot of money and do it quickly, the other is you build up an intelligent project and you have to base yourself on your academy and sound principles of working and scouting well and basically that’s what we’ve decided to do.’”

As it would happen, with their evolving philosophy now relying upon focussing on youth and promoting from within, Mbappé would fit the profile of this nouveau Monaco exactly. And this, remarkably, would be how Monaco, even if just for one season, toppled the immeasurable might of PSG.

The year prior, Mbappé had played a minor role in the story of Monaco’s season. Present but little more. In the season that was to follow, he would be trusted to play, if not the lead role, a starring, award-winning role nonetheless. And he would deliver in style. At the head of an unorthodox 4-4-2, which encouraged the side’s two tricky wingers to tuck in to accommodate a duo of marauding full-backs, alongside hotshot forward and captain Radamel Falcao, Mbappé thrived. Under the tutelage of a manager that had incredibly become known as a principally defensive-minded coach, Monaco became the embodiment of attacking prowess.

Racking up an outrageous 107 goals in 38 league fixtures, Monaco blew their rivals away with an arsenal few imagined they could possibly have stocked at the Stade Louis II. And while Falcao fired in 21, the Colombian fell far behind the season’s golden boot winner Edinson Cavani, who notched 35. This was proof alone of Monaco’s system. They relied on no single player. They were the most astute of teams.

In goal, Danijel Subašić performed admirably. Full-backs Djibril Sidibé and Benjamin Mendy routinely raided forward, endeavouring to engineer opportunities to cross, but rarely surrendered their defensive duties. At their defence’s centre, the unlikely pairing of Kamil Glik and Jemerson were a picture of stoicism. In the engine room of their midfield, Fabinho and Tiémoué Bakayoko would prove impassable while João Moutinho conducted the symphony around them. On the left and right flank, Monaco wielded Thomas Lemar and Bernardo Silva, wingers of varying styles bringing confidence and variety to the team’s offensive aspirations.



How Falcao rose to the top and overcame an unlikely fall from grace

Falcao dispersed the haze of pessimism that hung over him during his sideways spell in the Premier League and rediscovered his predatory instincts. Valère Germain deputised shrewdly, featuring more times for Monaco throughout the season than any other player. And then there was Mbappé.

The youngster’s sophomore season played out like a dream. Fittingly, he’d become a recurring nightmare to those who opposed him. A blur. That is all Mbappé was to so many defenders. An attacker lurking some place close by, on the shoulder or a few steps in front, a red and white-clad figure on the border of their peripheral vision, and then little more than a soon-to-be-celebrating coalescence of colour and noise. For so few players have onomatopoeic interjections and ad-libs ever come to the rescue of so many reporters whose reservoirs of unique adjectives quickly ran dry when attempting to describe his actions week after week.

For over a century, no player as young as Kylian Mbappé had scored 15 league goals in the top divisions of England, France, Germany, Italy or Spain. When Mbappé notched his 15th of the campaign, he was 18 years and 147 days old. By this point in the season, Monaco had already fallen for their number 29. By the season’s end, he’d hit the back of the net 26 times in all competitions, in addition to laying on 11 assists.

In spite of his years, Mbappé also proved pivotal in carrying Monaco’s offensive charge across the continent. During the course of the season, they preached the virtues of their new philosophy far beyond their domestic bounds and, in the Champions League, marched them all the way to the final four, disposing of Pep Guardiola’s Manchester City as well as Borussia Dortmund en route, before falling at the feet of the Old Lady of Turin.

Mbappé notched six times in nine European appearances and the young Parisian was subsequently voted into fourth place in the newly-introduced UEFA Forward of the Year competition, behind only Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi and Paulo Dybala. “The outstanding young player in an outstanding team of young players,” was how the association’s technical assessment described him. Mbappé made the UEFA Team of the Season and, for his year’s work, also claimed the UNFP Ligue 1 Young Player of the Year award.

* * *

One warm morning in July, not long after their title-winning season had drawn to a close, a knock came upon the boardroom door at Monaco headquarters. Muffled Spanish voices could be heard in the hall. The board members knew all too well what awaited them. Real Madrid had returned and they wished to relieve Les Monégasques of their prized possession.

Powerless to stand in his way, Monaco accepted the reported £161m bid on the table and prepared for Mbappé’s exit. Reluctant though they were, it remains true that every player has a price and, even in the 21st-century transfer market’s volatile and hyperinflated state, this sum represented a phenomenal profit on a teenager they had acquired for a mere pittance just a few short years before.

A private jet sat rumbling on a nearby runway, primed and ready to fly Mbappé direct to Miami to join his assumed soon-to-be teammates on their pre-season tour of the United States. Incredibly, Mbappé refused them – just as he had as a 14-year-old. Madrid were made to return to Spain with their tails between their legs. Then, barely a month later, Mbappé did move. He became the second-most expensive player in history on the day he signed for Paris Saint-Germain.

In the days following the colossal transfer, French journalist Ronan Boscher reflected on Mbappé’s move to PSG, stating: “It was the first time a French player had snubbed a big foreign club for a French club. It was a shock, but maybe it shouldn’t have been.”


Where does Edinson Cavani rank amongst his generation’s best strikers?

What Boscher’s comments serve to say is that it perhaps shouldn’t shock people to see a player opt to join his hometown club, the one proudly representing the city next to which the player in question grew up, the place he feels, above all other places on this planet, he and his family belongs. But what those words also mean is that nothing Mbappé does should surprise us anymore. Ridiculous though it seems to suggest, all the while speaking of a boy still in his teens, already it should be abundantly clear that Mbappé defies convention as a matter of daily routine.

* * *


In the weeks before Mbappé enrolled himself in the ranks of Les Rouge-et-Bleu, Paris Saint-Germain had already broken the world transfer record on the day they met Neymar’s release clause, a prerequisite to prizing him from the grasps of Barcelona. The Brazilian joined for a fee in excess of £220m.

In the media’s eyes, this transfer somewhat took the shine off of Mbappé’s own move to Paris; his switch the dessert that follows a gluttonous main course. But, typically, the young attacker cared not. His move to Paris was born from a desire to make history on the pitch, not off of it.

To little surprise, Mbappé hit the ground running in Paris in every sense of the phrase. On 8 September 2018, the attacker struck a goal on his debut in a 5-1 walk in the park against Metz. Four days later, as thanks for being handed a first Champions League start for PSG, Mbappé chipped in with one of his side’s five goals against Celtic in another simple victory.

Just as he had at Monaco, Mbappé aided his fellow forwards in forming one of the world’s most feared offences. With his completing of an attacking trident, alongside Neymar and Cavani, in their six Champions League group stage fixtures alone his team struck 25 times. Having already secured progression, PSG fell to a 3-1 defeat away to Munich but, by that point, had since scored five, three, four, five and seven in their preceding five fixtures. The numbers racked up by PSG, in far from the most elementary of groups, was shamelessly audacious.

When Mbappé fired his team’s only goal of the game away to Bayern, on 5 December, another fine record fell into his lap. At the age of 18 years, 11 months and five days, the Frenchman had his 10th Champions League goal. For context, the record that was now his had most recently belonged to Karim Benzema who only grabbed his 10th goal in the Champions League when he was almost two years Mbappé’s senior. Lionel Messi, meanwhile, totalled his 10 more than three months after turning 21.
Given the stunning influence he brought to his country’s under-19s side at the European Championships the year before, it was expected that Mbappé’s next international tournament outing would have been the 2017 FIFA Under-20s World Cup in South Korea. But delivering back-to-back league titles with alternate clubs demanded so much more and, by the eve of the aforementioned youth tournament, Mbappé had long since become a fully fledged member of the France senior team. Furthermore, Mbappé’s form had demanded he travel with them to the World Cup in Russia and his form also demanded he be seen as one of Les Blues’ most lethal weapons.

Mbappé had become France’s second youngest-ever debutant in March 2017, featuring sparingly against Luxembourg in a 2018 World Cup qualification match aged 18 years, three months and five days. Only Maryan Wisniewski, who debuted in 1955, had done so younger.

A little over five months on, Mbappé had his first goal for his country, scoring against the Netherlands in another World Cup qualifier. By the following May, the 19-year-old had successfully secured his seat on the plane departing for Moscow. He would, this confirmed, feature in some capacity in the quadrennial showpiece of world football. How great a role he would eventually play few could have dreamed up.

* * *

Paul Pogba slipped in and pickpocketed the ball from Peruvian captain, Paolo Guerrero. Sweeping the ball across the turf, his quick pass met the advancing run of Olivier Giroud. With his first touch, the Chelsea forward attempted a left-footed swipe towards goal but the shot was blocked by the outstretched leg of Alberto Rodríguez.

Having succeeded in not halting the ball but instead sending it skywards, Rodríguez’s deflection allowed the ball to loop over his goalkeeper and continue its goalbound path. Rushing in to ensure the job was completed without fault, Mbappé beat the scrambling goalkeeper to the drop and tapped the ball home. One-nil to France. A first strike of the tournament and another record for France’s youngest-ever World Cup goalscorer: the 19 years and 183 days old Mbappé.

The French had already squeezed beyond Australia in their tournament opener, in a narrow 2-1 victory, and, after defeating Peru by a solitary goal, were held to the competition’s only 0-0 draw with Denmark. They’d not set the world alight with their play but Les Blues had done enough to progress to the round of 16. There, they would meet Lionel Messi’s Argentina.

The pendulum swung wildly throughout the game; fortune favouring the Europeans, then the South Americans, then the Europeans again. Back and forth it went. Antoine Griezmann opened the scoring from the penalty spot, awarded after a panic-stricken Marcos Rojo had bundled the electric-heeled Mbappé to floor of the penalty area, before two goals either side of half-time – a stunning long-range strike from Ángel Di María and a deflected effort from Gabriel Mercado – put the Argentines in the driving seat. French auxiliary full-back Benjamin Pavard reclaimed parity, finding the top corner with a sumptuous half-volley that would later be voted the tournament’s finest goal, before Mbappé took it upon himself to decide the fate of the tie.

Striking twice in the space of just four minutes, Mbappé mercilessly finished two counter-attacks that ravaged a dizzied Argentina defence. Tucking the first under Franco Armani, having been teed up by a neat toe-poke into space from Giroud, Mbappé grabbed his second by working a yard of room in a crowded penalty area before smashing a low drive beyond Armani’s attempted dive. The full-time whistle brought the game to a halt with the score 4-2. France were into the quarter-finals.

Les Blues next orchestrated another mature performance in the following round, much needed in order to negotiate a 2-0 win from a difficult contest with Uruguay. Head coach Didier Deschamps had received criticism for stifling the attacking affluence available to him but, to his credit, he had instead focused on teaching his French ranks how to deploy the tactics necessary to overcome any opponent. Often flair was sacrificed in the name of pragmatism, and in the name of progression, and it worked. For their troubles, they were awarded a semi-final date with Belgium.

A similar story played out once again against Belgium. Try as they might, Les Rode Duivels couldn’t break down the French resistance – there was no white flag of France’s to be found – and Samuel Umtiti’s goal proved sufficient to carry his country into their third World Cup final. Croatia would meet them in Moscow.

France

In keeping with the entirety of the openly convention-defying tournament, the final would willingly do away with tradition on the goalscoring front. Not since 1986 had both finalists found the scoresheet twice or more and only those born to the early 1960s could remember a final that boasted as many as six goals. In every stadium in every Russian town and city, the tournament had found itself routinely punctuated by three distinct types of goal – penalties, own goals and screamers – and the final would buck no present trends in that particular regard.

The scoring opened with an own goal. The ball, sent into the area swirling by the left boot of Griezmann, found nobody but the scalp of Mario Mandžukić and, scarcely a second later, the back of the Croatian net. Ivan Perišić brought his country level with a well-worked solo effort but, before the half could expire, Griezmann had his say once again, this time from the penalty spot. A generous hand-ball decision, afforded by the video assistant referee, allowed France the opportunity to head into the break ahead, which they gladly took.

Midway into the second half, a howler from French captain Hugo Lloris allowed Mandžukić to find the net at the right end, opportunistically sneaking home a second Croatian goal, but by that point, France had already found their third and fourth of the evening.

The third came from Paul Pogba, a hard-earned rebound that capped a fine final showing of the tournament, while the fourth was all Mbappé’s: a slick right-footed slap from 25 yards that deceived his old teammate Danijel Subašić, tumbled into the bottom corner of the net, and secured for Mbappé likely the most remarkable of all his remarkable records to date. In that instant, he became only the second teenager ever to score in a World Cup final. The first had done so on 60 years earlier, on 29 June 1958, in the unforgettable final between Brazil and Sweden, and that particular teenager’s name was Pelé.

When asked if a World Cup triumph may sway future Ballon d’Or voters in his favour, Mbappé’s retort was typical of the focus and drive evidenced so regularly in his short career to date. “I couldn’t care less about that,” he assured his interviewer. “I want the World Cup. I want to sleep with it.”

On that champagne-soaked night, so long as he was able to wrestle the 18-carat gold trophy from the vicelike grasps of his equally infatuated compatriots, Mbappé was free to do just that. Though it may have paid to remind him that he no longer needed to sleep in order to hold the World Cup close to him. He was now a world champion for real. It was his to keep.

* * *

This summer, the unthinkable is happening: Lionel Messi is leaving Barcelona. It's the only club he's ever known as a professional, a place where he's won every trophy imaginable. But the relationship between Messi and Barcelona soured and last summer, he tried (and failed) to get out. This year, his contract expired on June 30 and despite every indication he would sign a new deal, financial constraints have forced Barcelona to abandon ship. Now that his move to Paris Saint-Germain has been confirmed, as we look back at his brilliant career for the Blaugrana. "In Barcelona, on Dec. 14, 2000, in the presence of [Josep Maria] Minguella and Horacio [Gaggioli], Carles Rexach, FC Barcelona's sporting director, hereby agrees, under his responsibility and regardless of any dissenting opinions, to sign the player Lionel Messi provided that we keep to the amounts agreed upon."
The above words, scribbled on a napkin following a game of tennis in Barcelona, were hastily written to assure Messi's father, Jorge, that the club was committed to signing his 13-year-old son. The game would never be the same.
Lionel Messi News: Soccer Star Is the Subject of a New Apple TV+ Docuseries


The new series follows up Messi Meets America, Apple’s 2023 look at the star striker’s arrival and first season in the MLS. Inter Miami begins the 2024 regular season also on February 21 with a match against Real Salt Lake.Lionel Messi is an Argentinian soccer player who has played for FC Barcelona, Paris Saint-Germain, and currently, the MLS club Inter Miami CF as well as the Argentina national team. As a teenager, Messi moved from Argentina to Spain after FC Barcelona agreed to pay for medical treatments related to his growth hormone disorder. At the club, he earned renown as one of the greatest players in history, helping FC Barcelona win more than two dozen league titles and tournaments. In 2012, he set a record for most goals in a calendar year and, a decade later, helped the Argentina national team win its third FIFA World Cup. The eight-time Ballon d’Or winner moved to Paris Saint-Germain in 2021, and in July 2023, he joined Inter Miami.Luis Lionel Andres “Leo” Messi was born on June 24, 1987, in Rosario, Argentina. As a young boy, Messi tagged along when his two older brothers played soccer with their friends, unintimidated by the bigger boys. At the age of 8, he was recruited to join the youth system of Newell’s Old Boys, a Rosario-based club.

Recognizably smaller than most of the kids in his age group, Messi was eventually diagnosed by doctors as suffering from a hormone deficiency that restricted his growth. Messi’s parents, Jorge and Ceclia, decided on a regimen of nightly growth-hormone injections for their son, though it soon proved impossible to pay several hundred dollars per month for the medication.

So, at the age of 13, when Messi was offered the chance to train at soccer powerhouse FC Barcelona’s youth academy, La Masia, and have his medical bills covered by the team, Messi’s family picked up and moved across the Atlantic to make a new home in Spain. Although he was often homesick in his new country, Messi moved quickly through the junior system ranks.

Ultimately, Messi’s short stature—5 feet, 7 inches—combined with his speed and relentless attacking style, has drawn comparisons to another famous Argentinian footballer, Diego Maradona.
FC Barcelona forward Lionel Messi celebrates after scoring in a January 2006 match. He played for the club for 17 seasons.
At age 13, Messi signed with FC Barcelona. His first appearance for the team was when he was 16. On May 1, 2005, Messi put himself in the record books as the youngest player to ever score a goal for the franchise.

Messi steered Barcelona to a wealth of success, most notably in 2009, when the left-footer’s team captured the Champions League, La Liga, and Spanish Super Cup titles. That same year, after two consecutive runner-up finishes, he took home his first FIFA World Player of the Year honor, as well as his first Ballon d’Or award, the top European individual honor in football.

Messi became the first Argentinian player to win the Ballon d’Or. Even the great Maradona gushed about his fellow countryman. “I see him as very similar to me,” the retired player told the BBC. “He’s a leader and is offering lessons in beautiful football. He has something different than any other player in the world.”

Amazingly, the soccer wizard continued to improve, discovering new ways to elude defenders while leading Barcelona to La Liga and Spanish Super Cup championships in 2010 and 2011, as well as the ’11 Champions League title.

Messi embarked on an all-out assault on the record books in 2012. He became the first player to score five goals in a Champions League match in early March, and a few weeks later, he surpassed Cesar Rodriguez’s club-record 232 goals to become Barcelona’s all-time leading scorer. By the end of the year, Messi had accumulated an astounding 91 goals in club and international play, eclipsing the 85 netted in a single calendar year by Gerd Muller in 1972. Fittingly, he broke another record when he was named the Ballon d’Or winner for the fourth consecutive time.

In 2013, the soccer great came back to earth somewhat due to the persistence of hamstring injuries, but he regained his record-breaking form by becoming the all-time leading scorer in La Liga and Champions League play in late 2014.

After helping Barcelona achieve a historic second treble in 2015, he was honored with his fifth Ballon d’Or trophy. Four years later, following another La Liga title, Messi again established a new standard for excellence by claiming his sixth Ballon d’Or.

On August 5, 2021, FC Barcelona announced it couldn’t resign Messi due to the team’s budget constraints and La Liga restrictions. Despite having voiced his desire to leave the club the prior season, Messi bid a teary farewell after 17 seasons: “This is really difficult for me after so many years spent here, being here my entire life. I’m not ready for this.”
On June 7, 2023, Messi told two Spanish media outlets he planned to play for the MLS club Inter Miami CF, which is partially owned by former soccer player David Beckham. “I have made the decision that I am going to Miami,” Messi said at the time, per ESPN. Messi later told Time he strongly considered joining a Saudi Arabian team before deciding on Inter Miami.

A little over a month later, on July 16, the team officially welcomed him on a 2.5-year contract that runs through the 2025 season. The deal was reportedly worth around $150 million, including an annual salary between $50 million and $60 million, a signing bonus, revenue sharing with the league’s media partner, and team equity upon retirement.
In summer 2005, Messi quickly made a name for himself on his native country’s under-20 squad. He led Argentina to the title in the FIFA U-20 World Cup, scoring on a pair of penalty kicks to propel the team over Nigeria. Less than two months later, he made his pro debut with Argentina in an August friendly match against Hungary but played less than two minutes before receiving a red card and being ejected from the game.

For all his success with Barcelona, Messi repeatedly came under fire for his inability to help Argentina’s national team win a major title. In the 2014 World Cup, Argentina lost to Germany in the final, though Messi was named player of the tournament that year. In 2016, following Argentina’s second consecutive loss to Chile in the final of the Copa America tournament, Messi announced he was ending his run with the national team.

The soccer great eventually reversed his decision, but his participation in the 2018 World Cup did not bring that elusive title, as hoped. After Messi scored an early goal in a 2-1 win over Nigeria that helped his team advance from the group stage, he was largely kept in check by France, his two assists not enough to stave off a 4-3 defeat that sent Argentina packing.

The following year, after Messi heavily criticized the referees in the wake of a 2-0 loss to Brazil in the Copa America semifinals, the Argentine captain was slapped with a three-game ban by the South American Football Confederation.

At last, in 2021 and 2022, Argentina and Messi found enough traction to bring home trophies that had long evaded them. First, the team won the Copa America—Argentina’s first major title in 28 years—in August 2021, besting Brazil in the final. Captain Messi tied for top goal scorer, alongside Colombia’s Luis Diaz, and was named player of the tournament. The next year, greater glory awaited at the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar.

Messi won FIFA’s World Player Trophy five times, including four consecutive wins between 2009 and 2012, and has collected its contemporary the Best FIFA Men’s Player three times, in 2019, 2022, and 2023.

The soccer legend has won Europe’s Ballon d’Or a record eight times. When he won the Ballon d’Or in October 2023, Messi became the first active MLS player to do so. He’s also won the European Golden Shoe for top scorer six times, two more than his nearest rival, Cristiano Ronaldo.

In 2023, Time magazine named Messi its Athlete of the Year, pointing to his remarkable impact on soccer’s growing popularity in the United States.

Cristiano Ronaldo News: Soccer Star Negotiating a New Contract
Portuguese soccer star Cristiano Ronaldo shared a cryptic message on social media, sparking new gossip about where the five-time Ballon d’Or winner will play next.

Ronaldo scored a goal in club team Al-Nassr’s season finale on May 26 but drew more attention with his subsequent post to X (formerly Twitter). “This chapter is over. The story? Still being written. Grateful to all,” he wrote.

The 40-year-old played for the Saudi Pro League team the past two years, scoring 99 goals in 111 total matches. However, his contract with Al-Nassr, which made him the highest-paid athlete in the world, is set to expire on June 30, meaning Ronaldo would become a free agent.

According to ESPN, Ronaldo, who has the most career goals of any men’s soccer player with 937, has reportedly received an offer to play for an unspecified Brazilian club team. This would allow him the chance to play in the Club World Cup held in the United States from June 14 through July 13. At least one commentator has suggested Ronaldo could even reunite with Lionel Messi in Major League Soccer.

In any case, fans and teams now await his decision.Who Is Cristiano Ronaldo?
Portuguese soccer superstar Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the greatest athletes in the sport’s history, winning the Ballon d’Or five times and becoming the first player to score 900 career goals. Considered a phenom as a teenager, 16-year-old Ronaldo signed with Manchester United in a record deal for a player of his age. He set a franchise record for goals scored in 2008, before transferring to Real Madrid the following year. He has since played for Italian Serie A club Juventus and is currently on the Al-Nassr FC squad in Saudi Arabia. Among his many accomplishments, Ronaldo led his home country to an emotional victory in the 2016 European Championship.Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro was born on February 5, 1985, in Funchal, Portugal, on the small island of Madeira off the country’s southwestern coast. He is the youngest of four children born to Maria Dolores dos Santos and José Dinis Aveiro. He was named after former U.S. President Ronald Reagan, one of his father’s favorite actors.

Ronaldo grew up in a largely working class neighborhood in a small tin-roofed home that overlooked the ocean. He was introduced to the game of soccer through his dad, who worked as an equipment manager at a boy’s club for a time.

His early life was shaped by hardship, as his father often drank too much. To help keep the children fed and maintain some financial stability, Ronaldo’s mother worked as a cook and cleaning person. The young athlete had often pushed for his father to enter rehab and address his drinking. His father, however, never accepted the offer.

By the time he was 10 years old, Ronaldo was already recognized as a phenom—a kid who ate, slept, and drank soccer. “All he wanted to do as a boy was play football,” his godfather, Fernao Sousa, recalled for British reporters, adding, “He loved the game so much he’d miss meals or escape out of his bedroom window with a ball when he was supposed to be doing his homework.”
Pro Soccer Career
Manchester United
Ronaldo had turned heads with a mesmerizing performance with Portugal against Manchester United, wowing even his opponents with his footwork and deft skill. He made such an impression that a number of United players asked their manager to try and sign the young player, which the team soon did.

In 2001, Manchester United paid more than £12 million to sign Ronaldo, then just 16 years old. The deal, worth more than $14 million U.S. dollars, was a record fee for a player of his age.

Ronaldo didn’t disappoint: He showed his promise early on in the 2004 FA Cup final, scoring the team’s first three goals and helping them capture the championship. In 2007, Ronaldo signed a five-year, £31 million contract.

A year later, Ronaldo again justified his high salary when he put together one of the club’s finest seasons in history, setting a franchise record for goals scored (42) and earning himself the FIFA World Player of the Year honor for 2008. In all, Ronaldo helped steer Manchester United to three Premier League titles.
Real Madrid
In 2009, the Spanish soccer club Real Madrid agreed to pay Manchester United a record $131 million for the chance to sign Ronaldo. Ronaldo’s commitment to Manchester United had come under constant question, and speculation swirled that he wanted to play elsewhere, so nobody was all that surprised to see Ronaldo leave.

“I know that they are going to demand a lot of me to be successful at the club, and I know that I’m going to have much more pressure than at Manchester United because I was there for many years,” Ronaldo told reporters. “But it means a new challenge and is going to help me be the best footballer.”

Ronaldo went on to compile an impressive list of individual honors and team trophies. In December 2016, he won his fourth Ballon d’Or award as the sport’s player of the year, beating out FC Barcelona’s Lionel Messi.

Ronaldo’s 2016 wins included the European Championship, Champions League, and Club World Cup, plus individual awards from UEFA and France Football magazine. The following year, he claimed a fifth Ballon d’Or to tie the mark held by his longtime rival, Messi.
Portugal National Team
On July 10, 2016, Ronaldo added an emotional victory to his collection. As his national team’s captain, Ronaldo led Portugal to the European Championship final against France.

Although he was sidelined after suffering a knee injury 25 minutes into the match, Portugal went on to win the championship title 1-0, their first international trophy. Ronaldo’s teammates said that he motivated them as team captain from the sidelines. “He gave us a lot of confidence and he said, ‘Listen people, I’m sure we will win this Euro, so stay together and fight for it,’” fullback Cedric Soares said after Portugal’s victory.

“This is one of the happiest moments in my career,” Ronaldo commented. “I’ve always said I wanted to win a trophy with the national team and make history. And I did it. Thank God, things went well for us.”

Ronaldo got off to a tremendous start at the 2018 World Cup, blasting home three goals in an opening draw versus Spain, before adding another versus Morocco to set a European record with his 85th international goal. However, he was held scoreless in a 2-1 loss to Uruguay in the knockout stage, after which he declined to comment on his future with the national team.

He returned for the 2022 World Cup but started on the bench for the team’s knockout games in the round of 16 and quarterfinals. Despite entering the latter match, Ronaldo couldn’t help the team erase a 1-0 deficit against Morocco.

Playing for Portugal on September 5, 2024, Ronaldo became the first men’s player to score 900 career goals across international and club play in a 2-1 UEFA Nations League win over Croatia.

His contributions to his country have been memorialized in a bronze bust of Ronaldo at the airport in Madeira, Portugal.
Ronaldo is in a long-term relationship with Spanish model Georgina Rodriguez. The pair were first seen together publicly around November 2016 and became an official couple the following year. Although neither has confirmed their potential marriage, Ronaldo has referred to Rodriguez as his wife in interviews as recently as July 2024.

Ronaldo and Rodriguez have four children. In June 2017, the couple welcomed twins, a boy named Mateo and a girl named Eva Maria, via a surrogate. In November 2017, Rodriguez added to their family with the birth of another girl, Alana Martina, and the couple most recently had daughter named Bella in April 2022.

Ronaldo’s eldest child, Cristiano Jr., was born to a former girlfriend in June 2010.
Sexual Assault Investigation
In 2018, police in Las Vegas reopened a 9-year old investigation into claims that Ronaldo had raped a woman in his hotel room. The accuser also filed a civil lawsuit against the star athlete.
The following summer, the district attorney for Clark County, Nevada, announced that he had reviewed the case and wouldn’t pursue criminal charges against Ronaldo.