The attacking player (#10) attempts to kick the ball into the net behind the opposing team's goalkeeper (here wearing red and yellow) to score a goal.
Highest governing body	FIFA Olympic Men's since the 1900 Olympics and women's since the 1996 Olympics
Paralympic5-a-side since 2004 and 7-a-side from 1984 to 2016 Association football, more commonly known as football or soccer,[a] is a team sport played between two teams of 11 players each, who almost exclusively use their feet to propel a ball around a rectangular field called a pitch. The objective of the game is to score more goals than the opposing team by moving the ball beyond the goal line into a rectangular-framed goal defended by the opposing team. Traditionally, the game has been played over two 45-minute halves, for a total match time of 90 minutes. With an estimated 250 million players active in over 200 countries and territories, it is the world's most popular sport.

The game of association football is played in accordance with the Laws of the Game, a set of rules that has been in effect since 1863 and maintained by the IFAB since 1886. The game is played with a football that is 68–70 cm (27–28 in) in circumference. The two teams compete to score goals by getting the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts, under the bar, and fully across the goal line). When the ball is in play, the players mainly use their feet, but may also use any other part of their body, such as their head, chest, and thighs, except for their hands or arms, to control, strike, or pass the ball. Only the goalkeepers may use their hands and arms, and that only within the penalty area. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner. There are situations where a goal can be disallowed, such as an offside call or a foul in the build-up to the goal. Depending on the format of the competition, an equal number of goals scored may result in a draw being declared with 1 point awarded to each team, or the game goes into extra time or a penalty shoot-out.[5]

Internationally, association football is governed by FIFA. Under FIFA, there are six continental confederations: AFC, CAF, CONCACAF, CONMEBOL, OFC, and UEFA. Of these confederations, CONMEBOL is the oldest one, being founded in 1916. National associations (e.g. the FA in England, the U.S. Soccer in the United States, Canada Soccer in Canada, Football Australia in Australia, New Zealand Football in New Zealand, etc) are responsible for managing the game in their own countries both professionally and at an amateur level, and coordinating competitions in accordance with the Laws of the Game.

The most prestigious senior international competition is the FIFA World Cup. The men's World Cup is the most-viewed sporting event in the world, surpassing the Olympic Games.[6] The two most prestigious competitions in club football are the UEFA Champions League and the UEFA Women's Champions League, which attract an extensive television audience worldwide. The final of the men's tournament is the most-watched annual sporting event in the world.[7][8]

Names for association football
Association football is one of a family of football codes that emerged from various ball games played worldwide since antiquity. Within the English-speaking world, the sport is now usually called "football" in Great Britain and most of Ulster in the north of Ireland,[9] whereas people usually call it "soccer" in regions and countries where other codes of football are prevalent, such as Australia,[10] Canada, South Africa, most of Ireland (excluding Ulster),[11] and the United States. A notable exception is New Zealand, where in the first two decades of the 21st century, under the influence of international television, "football" has been gaining prevalence, despite the dominance of other codes of football, namely rugby union and rugby league.[12]

The term soccer comes from Oxford "-er" slang, which was prevalent at the University of Oxford in England from about 1875, and is thought to have been borrowed from the slang of Rugby School. Initially spelt assoccer (a shortening of "association"), it was later reduced to the modern spelling.[13][14] This form of slang also gave rise to rugger for rugby football, fiver and tenner for five pound and ten pound notes, and the now-archaic footer that was also a name for association football.[15] The word soccer arrived at its current form in 1895 and was first recorded in 1889 in the earlier form of socca.[16]

History of association football
On the left, an episkyros player on an ancient stone carving, c. 375–400 BCE, exhibited at the National Archaeological Museum, Athens;[17] on the right, children playing cuju in Song dynasty China, 12th century
Kicking ball games arose independently multiple times across multiple cultures.[b] The Chinese competitive game cuju (蹴鞠, literally "kickball"; also known as tsu chu) resembles modern association football as well as a mix of basketball, and volleyball. [18][19] This is the earliest form of a kicking game for which there is historical evidence. The game was first recorded as in exercise in the Zhan Guo Ce, a military history from the Han dynasty.[20] Cuju players would pass the ball around, having to avoid it touching the ground at any point. It was then passed to a designated player, who attempted to kick it through the fengliu yan, a circular goal atop 10–11 meter poles.[18] During the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE), cuju games were standardised and rules were established.[21] The Silk Road facilitated the transmission of cuju outside of China, especially the form of the game popular in the Tang dynasty, the period when the inflatable ball was invented and replaced the stuffed ball.[22] Other East Asian games include kemari in Japan and chuk-guk in Korea, both influenced by cuju.[23][24] Kemari originated after the year 600 during the Asuka period. It was a ceremonial rather than a competitive game, and involved the kicking of a mari, a ball made of animal skin.[25] In North America, pasuckuakohowog was a ball game played by the Algonquians; it was described as "almost identical to the kind of folk football being played in Europe at the same time, in which the ball was kicked through goals".[26]


Calcio match in Piazza Santa Maria Novella, in Florence, Italy. Painting by Jan Van der Straet.
Phaininda and episkyros were Greek ball games.[20][27] An image of an episkyros player depicted in low relief on a stele of c. 375–400 BCE in the National Archaeological Museum of Athens[17] appears on the UEFA European Championship trophy.[28] Athenaeus, writing in 228 CE, mentions the Roman ball game harpastum. Phaininda, episkyros and harpastum were played involving hands and violence. They all appear to have resembled rugby football, wrestling, and volleyball more than what is recognisable as modern football.[21][29][30][31][32][33]

In the Middle Ages, one of the best-known games was calcio storico fiorentino, which originated in the city of Florence, Italy. This sport was similar to modern football in several ways, because of the festive atmosphere in which these matches were played.[34] Another medieval sport that can be considered a type of medieval football is La Soule or Choule, played in medieval France, in which the ball was propelled by hands, feet, and sticks,[35] dating from the 12th century.[36] As with pre-codified mob football, the antecedent of all modern football codes, these five games involved more handling the ball than kicking it.[37][3]

Association football in itself does not have a classical history.[28] Notwithstanding any similarities to other ball games played around the world, FIFA has described that no historical connection exists with any game played in antiquity outside Europe.[3] The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century.[38] The modern rules of association football are based on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England.

The "Laws of the University Foot Ball Club" (Cambridge Rules) of 1856
The Cambridge rules, first drawn up at the University of Cambridge in 1848, were particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes, including association football. The Cambridge rules were written at Trinity College, Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, Winchester and Shrewsbury schools. They were not universally adopted. During the 1850s, many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English-speaking world to play various forms of football. Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, formed by former public school pupils in 1857,[39] which led to the formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867. In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules.[40]


An early draft of the original hand-written 'Laws of the Game' drawn up on behalf of The Football Association by Ebenezer Cobb Morley in 1863 on display at the National Football Museum in Manchester
These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association (The FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London.[41] The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse. The Freemasons' Tavern was the setting for five more meetings of The FA between October and December 1863; the English FA eventually issued the first comprehensive set of rules named Laws of the Game, forming modern football.[42] The laws included bans on running with the ball in hand and hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding.[43] Eleven clubs, under the charge of FA secretary Ebenezer Cobb Morley, ratified the original thirteen laws of the game.[41] The sticking point was hacking, which a twelfth club at the meeting, Blackheath FC, had wanted to keep, resulting in them withdrawing from the FA.[41] Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA, and instead in 1871, along with Blackheath, formed the Rugby Football Union. The FA rules included handling of the ball by "marks" and the lack of a crossbar, rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football being developed at that time in Australia. The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s, with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games.[44]


The Aston Villa team in 1897, after winning both the FA Cup and the English Football League
The world's oldest football competition is the FA Cup, which was founded by the footballer and cricketer Charles W. Alcock, and has been contested by English teams since 1872. The first official international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of Alcock. England is also home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor.[45] The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England.[46]

Laws of the Game are determined by the International Football Association Board (IFAB).[47] The board was formed in 1886[48] after a meeting in Manchester of the Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association. FIFA, the international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to the Laws of the Game of the Football Association.[49] The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the IFAB in 1913. The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations.[50]

For most of the 20th century, Europe and South America were the dominant regions in association football. The FIFA World Cup, inaugurated in 1930, became the main stage for players of both continents to show their worth and the strength of their national teams.[51] In the second half of the century, the European Cup and the Copa Libertadores were created, and the champions of these two club competitions would contest the Intercontinental Cup to prove which team was the best in the world.[52]

In the 21st century, South America has continued to produce some of the best footballers in the world,[53] but its clubs have fallen behind the still dominant European clubs, which often sign the best players from Latin America and elsewhere.[51][53] Meanwhile, football has improved in Africa, Asia and North America,[53] and nowadays, these regions are at least on equal grounds with South America in club football,[54] although countries in the Caribbean and Oceania regions (except Australia) have yet to make a mark in international football.[55][56] When it comes to men's national teams, Europeans and South Americans continue to dominate the FIFA World Cup, as no team from any other region has managed to even reach the final.[51][53] These regional trends do not hold true for the women's game, as the United States women's national team has won the FIFA Women's World Cup four times, more than any other women's team.[57]

Football is played at a professional level all over the world. Millions of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams,[58] while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet.[59][60] A very large number of people also play football at an amateur level. According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football.[61] Football has the highest global television audience in sport.[62]

In many parts of the world, football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations. Ryszard Kapuściński says that Europeans who are polite, modest, or humble fall easily into rage when playing or watching football games.[63] The Ivory Coast national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 2006[64] and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouaké, an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time.[65] By contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras.[66] The sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence of the 1990s, when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into rioting in May 1990.[67]

 Women's association football
Women's association football has historically seen opposition, with national associations severely curbing its development and several outlawing it completely. Women may have been playing football for as long as the game has existed. Evidence shows that a similar ancient game (cuju, or tsu chu) was played by women during the Han dynasty (25–220 CE), as female figures are depicted in frescoes of the period playing tsu chu.[68][69] There are also reports of annual football matches played by women in Midlothian, Scotland, during the 1790s.[70][71]

North team of the British Ladies', the first organised women's football team, here pictured in March 1895
Association football, the modern game, has documented early involvement of women.[71] In 1863, football governing bodies introduced standardised rules to prohibit violence on the pitch, making it more socially acceptable for women to play.[72] The first match recorded by the Scottish Football Association took place in 1892 in Glasgow.[70] In England, the first recorded game of football between women took place in 1895.[72] Women's football has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, particularly in the United Kingdom.[73]

Association football continued to be played by women since the time of the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century.[73][74] The best-documented early European team was founded by activist Nettie Honeyball in England in 1894. It was named the British Ladies' Football Club. Honeyball is quoted as, "I founded the association late last year [1894], with the fixed resolve of proving to the world that women are not the 'ornamental and useless' creatures men have pictured. I must confess, my convictions on all matters where the sexes are so widely divided are all on the side of emancipation, and I look forward to the time when ladies may sit in Parliament and have a voice in the direction of affairs, especially those which concern them most."[75] Honeyball and those like her paved the way for women's football. However, the women's game was frowned upon by the British football associations and continued without their support. It has been suggested that this was motivated by a perceived threat to the "masculinity" of the game.[76]


Women's football became popular on a large scale at the time of the First World War, when female employment in heavy industry spurred the growth of the game, much as it had done for men 50 years earlier. The most successful team of the era was Dick, Kerr Ladies F.C. of Preston, England. The team played in one of the first women's international matches against a French XI team in 1920,[77][78] and also made up most of the England team against a Scottish Ladies XI in the same year, winning 22–0.[70]

Despite being more popular than some men's football events, with one match seeing a 53,000 strong crowd in 1920,[79][80] women's football in England suffered a blow in 1921 when The Football Association outlawed the playing of the game on association members' pitches,[81] stating that "the game of football is quite unsuitable for females and should not be encouraged."[82] Players and football writers have argued that this ban was, in fact, due to envy of the large crowds that women's matches attracted,[80] and because the FA had no control over the money made from the women's game.[82] The FA ban led to the formation of the short-lived English Ladies Football Association and play moved to rugby grounds.[83] Women's football also faced bans in several other countries, notably in Brazil from 1941 to 1979,[84] in France from 1941 to 1970,[85] and in Germany from 1955 to 1970.[86]


A young Finnish girls' football team in Sweden
Restrictions began to be reduced in the 1960s and 1970s. The Italian women's football league was established in 1968.[87] In December 1969, the Women's Football Association was formed in England,[73][88] with the sport eventually becoming the most prominent team sport for women in the United Kingdom.[73] Two unofficial women's World Cups were organised by the FIEFF in 1970 and in 1971. Also in 1971, UEFA members voted to officially recognise women's football,[73] while The Football Association rescinded the ban that prohibited women from playing on association members' pitches in England.[88]

Women's football still faces many struggles, but its worldwide growth[89] has seen major competitions being launched at both the national and international levels, mirroring the men's competitions. The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991: the first tournament was held in China, featuring 12 teams from the respective six confederations. The World Cup has been held every four years since;[90] by 2019, it had expanded to 24 national teams, and 1.12 billion viewers watched the competition.[91] Four years later, FIFA targeted the 32-team 2023 Women's World Cup at an audience of 2 billion,[92] while about 1.4 million tickets were sold, setting a Women's World Cup record.[93] Women's football has been an Olympic event since 1996.[94]

North America is the dominant region in women's football, with the United States winning the most FIFA Women's World Cups and Olympic tournaments. Europe and Asia come second and third in terms of international success,[95][96] and the women's game has been improving in South America.[97]

One half of a professional football match (45 minutes) between Slovenian clubs NK Nafta 1903 and NK Dob. The score after the half is 0–0.
Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game. The game is played using a spherical ball of 68–70 cm (27–28 in) circumference,[98] known as the football (or soccer ball). Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw. Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to represent their team in the coin toss before kick-off or penalty kicks.[5]

The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they must use both their hands during a throw-in restart. Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around, they may use any part of their body (notably, "heading" with the forehead)[99] other than their hands or arms.[100] Within normal play, all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch, though players may not pass to teammates who are in an offside position.[101]

During gameplay, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a teammate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; however, physical contact between opponents is restricted. Football is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules. After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart.[102]


A player executing a slide tackle to dispossess an opponent
At a professional level, most matches produce only a few goals. For example, the 2022–23 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2.85 goals per match.[103] The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper,[104] but a number of specialised roles have evolved.[105] Broadly, these include three main categories: strikers, or forwards, whose main task is to score goals; defenders, who specialise in preventing their opponents from scoring; and midfielders, who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of the ball to pass it to the forwards on their team. Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players, to distinguish them from the goalkeeper.[citation needed]

These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends the most time. For example, there are central defenders and left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination. The number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style of play. While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time.[106] The layout of a team's players is known as a formation. Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager.[107]

Laws
"Rules of football" redirects here. For the rules of other football games, see Football.
Further information: Laws of the Game (association football)
There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection of stipulations and guidelines. The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football for both sexes, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors and people with physical disabilities are permitted.[c] The laws are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game. The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are maintained by the IFAB.[108] In addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of association football.[109][110] Within the United States, Major League Soccer used a distinct ruleset during the 1990s[111] and the National Federation of State High School Associations and NCAA still use rulesets that are comparable to, but different from, the IFAB Laws.[citation needed]

Players, equipment, and officials
See also: Association football positions, Formation (association football), Substitute (association football), and Kit (association football)

The referee officiates in a football match
Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper. Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven. Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the Laws.[104]

The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt, shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards. An athletic supporter and protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and professionals.[112][113] Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury.[114] Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player, such as jewellery or watches. The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials.[115]

A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game. The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive international and domestic league games is five in 90 minutes,[116] with each team being allowed one more if the game should go into extra-time; the permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches. Common reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game. In standard adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match.[117] IFAB recommends "that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team". Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations.[118]

A game is officiated by a referee, who has "full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed" (Law 5), and whose decisions are final. The referee is assisted by two assistant referees. In many high-level games there is also a fourth official who assists the referee and may replace another official should the need arise.[119]

Goal line technology is used to measure if the whole ball has crossed the goal-line thereby determining whether a goal has been scored or not; this was brought in to prevent controversy. Video assistant referees (VAR) have also been increasingly introduced in high-level matches to assist officials through video replays to correct clear and obvious mistakes. There are four types of calls that can be reviewed: mistaken identity in awarding a red or yellow card, goals and whether there was a violation during the buildup, direct red card decisions, and penalty decisions.[120]

Ball Main article: Ball (association football)
A typical ball The ball is spherical with a circumference of between 68 and 70 cm (27 and 28 in), a weight in the range of 410 to 450 g (14 to 16 oz), and a pressure between 0.6 and 1.1 standard atmospheres (8.5 and 15.6 pounds per square inch) at sea level. In the past the ball was made up of leather panels sewn together, with a latex bladder for pressurisation, but modern balls at all levels of the game are now synthetic.[121][122]

Pitch Main article: Football pitch
Standard pitch measurements
As the Laws were formulated in England, and were initially administered solely by the four British football associations within IFAB, the standard dimensions of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units. The Laws now express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents (followed by traditional units in brackets), though use of imperial units remains popular in English-speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication (or only partial metrication), such as Britain.[123]

The length of the pitch, or field, for international adult matches is in the range of 100–110 m (110–120 yd) and the width is in the range of 64–75 m (70–80 yd). Fields for non-international matches may be 90–120 m (100–130 yd) in length and 45–90 m (50–100 yd) in width, provided the pitch does not become square. In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m (115 yd) long and 68 m (74 yd) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches;[124] however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented.[125]

The longer boundary lines are touchlines, while the shorter boundaries (on which the goals are placed) are goal lines. A rectangular goal is positioned on each goal line, midway between the two touchlines.[126] The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 7.32 m (24 ft) apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 2.44 m (8 ft) above the ground. Nets are usually placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws.[127]

In front of the goal is the penalty area. This area is marked by the goal line, two lines starting on the goal line 16.5 m (18 yd) from the goalposts and extending 16.5 m (18 yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a line joining them. This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick. Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, penalty kicks and corner kicks.[128]

Duration and tie-breaking methods
90-minute ordinary time
A standard adult football match consists of two halves of 45 minutes each. Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play. There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves. The end of the match is known as full-time.[129] The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This added time is called "additional time" in FIFA documents,[130][131] but is most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, while lost time can also be used as a synonym. The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee. Stoppage time does not fully compensate for the time in which the ball is out of play, and a 90-minute game typically involves about an hour of "effective playing time".[132][133] The referee alone signals the end of the match. In matches where a fourth official is appointed, towards the end of the half, the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time they intend to add. The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number. The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee.[129] Added time was introduced because of an incident in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa. Trailing 1–0 with two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty kick. Villa's goalkeeper deliberately kicked the ball far out of play; by the time it was recovered, the clock had run out and the game was over, leaving Stoke unable to attempt the penalty.[134] The same law also states that the duration of either half is extended until a penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed; thus, no game can end with an uncompleted penalty.[135]

Tie-breaking
Main article: Determining the Outcome of a Match (association football)

Most knockout competitions use a penalty shoot-out to decide the winner if a match ends as a draw
In league competitions, games may end in a draw. In knockout competitions where a winner is required, various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock; some competitions may invoke replays.[136] A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of penalty shoot-outs (known officially in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the penalty mark") to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament or be the champion. Goals scored during extra time periods count towards the final score of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament, with goals scored in a penalty shoot-out not making up part of the final score.[5]

In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses. Where aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home. If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially a penalty shoot-out are required.[5]

Ball in and out of play
Main article: Ball in and out of play

A player takes a free kick, while the opposition form a "wall" to try to block the ball
Under the Laws, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a kick-off until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:

Kick-off: following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each period of play.[102]
Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to the opposing team to that which last touched the ball.[137]
Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team; awarded to defending team.[138]
Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team; awarded to attacking team.[139]
Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred. A goal may not be scored directly (without the ball first touching another player) from an indirect free kick.[140]
Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" fouls.[140] A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area.[141]
Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective.[102]
Misconduct
Main article: Foul (association football)
On-field


Players are cautioned with a yellow card, and dismissed from the game with a red card. These colours were first introduced at the 1970 FIFA World Cup and used consistently since.
A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game while the ball is in play. The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12. Handling the ball deliberately, tripping an opponent, or pushing an opponent, are examples of "penal fouls", punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred. Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick.[100]

The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution (yellow card) or dismissal (red card). A second yellow card in the same game leads to a red card, which results in a dismissal. A player given a yellow card is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in their official notebook. If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought on in their place and the player may not participate in further play. Misconduct may occur at any time, and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed, the definitions are broad. In particular, the offence of "unsporting behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game, even if they are not listed as specific offences. A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player, substitute, substituted player, and to non-players such as managers and support staff.[100][142]

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known as "playing an advantage".[143] The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few seconds". Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play.[144]

The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final.[145] The score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows that decisions (including awards/non-awards of goals) were incorrect.[citation needed]

Off-field
See also: Foul (association football) § Post-match
Along with the general administration of the sport, football associations and competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game, dealing with issues such as comments to the press, clubs' financial management, doping, age fraud and match fixing. Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players who are sent off in a game.[146] Some on-field incidents, if considered very serious (such as allegations of racial abuse), may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card.[d] Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh.[146]

Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on clubs as a whole. Penalties may include fines, point deductions (in league competitions) or even expulsion from competitions. For example, the English Football League deduct 12 points from any team that enters financial administration.[147] Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture. Teams that had forfeited a game or had been forfeited against would be awarded a technical loss or win.[citation needed]

Governing bodies
See also: Association football around the world

Headquarters of FIFA, the world governing body of football
The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, such as futsal and beach soccer)[c] is FIFA. The FIFA headquarters are located in Zürich, Switzerland. Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these are:[148]

Asia: Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
South America: Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)
National associations (or national federations) oversee football within individual countries. These are generally synonymous with sovereign states (for example, the Cameroonian Football Federation in Cameroon), but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for example, the Scottish Football Association in Scotland). 211 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations.[148] Other national associations may be members of continental confederations but otherwise not participate in FIFA competitions.[149]

While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to international competition, the actual Laws of the Game are set by the IFAB, where each of the UK Associations has one vote, while FIFA collectively has four votes.[50]

International competitions
List of association football competitions
The FIFA World Cup is the largest international competition in football and the world's most viewed sporting event
International competitions in association football principally consist of two varieties: competitions involving representative national teams or those involving clubs based in multiple nations and national leagues. International football, without qualification, most often refers to the former. In the case of international club competition, it is the country of origin of the clubs involved, not the nationalities of their players, that renders the competition international in nature.[citation needed]

The major international competition in football and the most prestigious is the World Cup, organised by FIFA. This competition has taken place every four years since 1930, with the exception of the 1942 and 1946 tournaments, which were cancelled because of World War II. As of 2022, over 200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals.[150] The finals tournament involved 32 national teams (expanding to 48 teams for the 2026 tournament) competing over a four-week period.[151][e] The World Cup is the world's most widely viewed and most followed sporting event, with the 2022 tournament estimated to be watched by 5 billion people, more than 60% of the global population.[152] The 1958 World Cup saw the emergence of Pelé as a global sporting star, a period that coincided with "the explosive spread of television, which massively amplified his presence everywhere".[153] The current champions are Argentina, who won their third title at the 2022 tournament in Qatar.[154] The FIFA Women's World Cup has been held every four years since 1991. Under the tournament's current format that was expanded in 2023, national teams vie for 31 slots in a three-year qualification phase, while the host nation's team enters automatically as the 32nd slot.[155] The current champions are Spain, after winning their first title in the 2023 tournament.[156]

There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles when FIFA and the International Olympic Committee had disagreed over the status of amateur players.[157][158] Before the inception of the World Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) were the most prestigious international event. Originally, the tournament was for amateurs only.[49] As professionalism spread around the world, the gap in quality between the World Cup and the Olympics widened. The countries that benefited most were the Soviet Bloc countries of Eastern Europe, where top athletes were state-sponsored while retaining their status as amateurs. Between 1948 and 1980, 23 out of 27 Olympic medals were won by Eastern Europe, with only Sweden (gold in 1948 and bronze in 1952), Denmark (bronze in 1948 and silver in 1960) and Japan (bronze in 1968) breaking their dominance. For the 1984 Los Angeles Games, the IOC allowed professional players to compete. Since 1992, male competitors must be under 23 years old, although since 1996, three players over the age of 23 have been allowed per squad.[159] A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic tournament.[160]

Spanish footballers Fernando Torres, Juan Mata, and Sergio Ramos celebrating winning the UEFA European Championship in 2012
After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are the continental championships, which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams. These are the European Championship (UEFA), the Copa América (CONMEBOL), the Africa Cup of Nations (CAF), the Asian Cup (AFC), the Gold Cup (CONCACAF) and the Nations Cup (OFC).[161] These competitions are not strictly limited to members of the continental confederations, with guest teams from other continents sometimes invited to compete.[162] The FIFA Confederations Cup was contested by the winners of all six continental championships, the current FIFA World Cup champions, and the country which was hosting the next World Cup. This was generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and did not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself.[161] The tournament was discontinued following the 2017 edition with its calendar slot replaced by an expanded FIFA Club World Cup.[163] The Finallisima was revitalized in 2022, and is contested between the Copa America and European Championship winners. UEFA Nations League and the CONCACAF Nations League were introduced in the late 2010s to replace international friendlies during the two-year cycle between major tournaments.[164]

The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between national champions, for example, the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America. The winners of each continental competition contest the FIFA Intercontinental Cup, held annually, and the FIFA Club World Cup, held once every four years.[165]

Domestic competitions

This section possibly contains original research. Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. Statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (March 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Main articles: Geography of association football and Geography of women's association football

A 2009 Spanish La Liga match between Real Madrid and Barcelona. The fixture, known as El Clásico, is one of the most renowned in sport.[166]
In each country, football clubs are usually federated in associations or leagues that organize official tournaments among themselves, from which the champions of each country and the teams that will participate in international tournaments emerge. There is no unique system of tournaments and each national league organizes them according to its traditions.

The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results. Teams are placed into tables, placing them in order according to points accrued. In the Old World (Africa, Asia and Europe), each team plays every other team in its league at home and away in each season, in a round-robin tournament. At the end of a season, the top team is declared the champion. The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division, and one or more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower division.[167]

The main exceptions to this system occur in the New World (Americas) and Australia:
The majority of the Latin American leagues (including Liga MX from Mexico and Liga Profesional de Fútbol from Argentina) divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish for Opening and Closing), awarding a champion for each.[168] After a first phase using points in a round-robin tournament, Latin American leagues usually have a knockout phase, with a final defining the champion of each Apertura and Clausura tournament. In some countries the winners of the Apertura and Clausura play each other in a playoff for the season title.
The Brazilian Serie A uses a single-season double round-robin format to decide the champions, similar to those in European leagues, though played between May and December. Brazilian clubs also participate in the state leagues from January to April, some of which do feature a split season format similar to the Apertura and Clausura. Brazil has never used an Apertura and Clausura system in its national tournament, but rather many different systems with play-offs until 2002.
Major League Soccer in the United States and Canada uses a closed league system (without promotion and relegation) and a conference system, similar to that used in other sports leagues in both countries. In each conference, clubs participate in a round-robin tournament, with those with the best points during the regular season qualifying for the playoffs, with a final to determine the champion.
The A-League in Australia uses a closed league system, at the end of a regular season in a round-robin tournament format, the clubs with the best points compete in playoffs to determine the league champion.
The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may also be eligible to play in international club competitions in the following season. Most countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions organised on a knock-out basis. These include the domestic cup, which may be open to all eligible teams in a country's league system—both professional and amateur—and is organised by the national federation.[169]

Some countries' top divisions feature highly-paid star players; in smaller countries, lower divisions, and many women's clubs, players may be part-timers with a second job, or amateurs. The five top European leagues – Premier League (England),[170] Bundesliga (Germany), La Liga (Spain), Serie A (Italy), and Ligue 1 (France) – attract most of the world's best players and, during the 2006–07 season, each of these leagues had a total wage cost in excess of €600 million.[171][needs update] These leagues also generated a combined €17.2 billion in revenue in the 2021–22 season from television contracts, matchday tickets, sponsorships, and other sources.[172]

Variants and casual play
See also: List of types of football
Variants of football have been codified for reduced-sized teams (i.e. five-a-side football) play in non-field environments (i.e. beach soccer, indoor soccer, and futsal) and for teams with disabilities (i.e. paralympic association football).

Street football can be played with only minimal equipment – a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to mark the positions of two sets of goalposts. Such games can have team sizes that vary from eleven-a-side, can use a limited or modified subset of the official rules, and can be self-officiated by the players.

Soccer-Kamada, Kubo strike as Japan become first nation to qualify for World Cup • Mar. 20, 2025, 3:28 AM ET (The Star) 
football, game in which two teams of 11 players, using any part of their bodies except their hands and arms, try to maneuver the ball into the opposing team’s goal. Only the goalkeeper is permitted to handle the ball and may do so only within the penalty area surrounding the goal. The team that scores more goals wins.

Carlos Alberto Torres
Carlos Alberto TorresCaptain Carlos Alberto Torres holding the Jules Rimet trophy aloft after Brazil's triumph at the 1970 World Cup.
Football is the world’s most popular ball game in numbers of participants and spectators. Simple in its principal rules and essential equipment, the sport can be played almost anywhere, from official football playing fields (pitches) to gymnasiums, streets, school playgrounds, parks, or beaches. Football’s governing body, the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), estimated that at the turn of the 21st century there were approximately 250 million football players and over 1.3 billion people “interested” in football; in 2010 a combined television audience of more than 26 billion watched football’s premier tournament, the quadrennial monthlong World Cup finals.

History
The early years
The history behind the FIFA World Cup
The history behind the FIFA World CupWatch this video to learn more about the history of the FIFA World Cup.
See all videos for this article
Modern football originated in Britain in the 19th century. Since before medieval times, “folk football” games had been played in towns and villages according to local customs and with a minimum of rules. Industrialization and urbanization, which reduced the amount of leisure time and space available to the working class, combined with a history of legal prohibitions against particularly violent and destructive forms of folk football to undermine the game’s status from the early 19th century onward. However, football was taken up as a winter game between residence houses at public (independent) schools such as Winchester College, Charterhouse, and Eton College. Each school had its own rules; some allowed limited handling of the ball and others did not. The variance in rules made it difficult for public schoolboys entering university to continue playing except with former schoolmates. As early as 1843 an attempt to standardize and codify the rules of play was made at the University of Cambridge, whose students joined most public schools in 1848 in adopting these “Cambridge rules,” which were further spread by Cambridge graduates who formed football clubs. In 1863 a series of meetings involving clubs from metropolitan London and surrounding counties produced the printed rules of football, which prohibited the carrying of the ball. Thus, the “handling” game of rugby remained outside the newly formed Football Association (FA). Indeed, by 1870 all handling of the ball except by the goalkeeper was prohibited by the FA.

The new rules were not universally accepted in Britain, however; many clubs retained their own rules, especially in and around Sheffield. Although this northern English city was the home of the first provincial club to join the FA, in 1867 it also gave birth to the Sheffield Football Association, the forerunner of later county associations. Sheffield and London clubs played two matches against each other in 1866, and a year later a match pitting a club from Middlesex against one from Kent and Surrey was played under the revised rules. In 1871 15 FA clubs accepted an invitation to enter a cup competition and to contribute to the purchase of a trophy. By 1877 the associations of Great Britain had agreed upon a uniform code, 43 clubs were in competition, and the London clubs’ initial dominance had diminished.

Serena Williams poses with the Daphne Akhurst Trophy after winning the Women's Singles final against Venus Williams of the United States on day 13 of the 2017 Australian Open at Melbourne Park on January 28, 2017 in Melbourne, Australia. (tennis, sports)
Britannica Quiz
Great Moments in Sports Quiz
Professionalism
The development of modern football was closely tied to processes of industrialization and urbanization in Victorian Britain. Most of the new working-class inhabitants of Britain’s industrial towns and cities gradually lost their old bucolic pastimes, such as badger-baiting, and sought fresh forms of collective leisure. From the 1850s onward, industrial workers were increasingly likely to have Saturday afternoons off work, and so many turned to the new game of football to watch or to play. Key urban institutions such as churches, trade unions, and schools organized working-class boys and men into recreational football teams. Rising adult literacy spurred press coverage of organized sports, while transport systems such as the railways or urban trams enabled players and spectators to travel to football games. Average attendance in England rose from 4,600 in 1888 to 7,900 in 1895, rising to 13,200 in 1905 and reaching 23,100 at the outbreak of World War I. Football’s popularity eroded public interest in other sports, notably cricket.

Leading clubs, notably those in Lancashire, started charging admission to spectators as early as the 1870s and so, despite the FA’s amateurism rule, were in a position to pay illicit wages to attract highly skilled working-class players, many of them hailing from Scotland. Working-class players and northern English clubs sought a professional system that would provide, in part, some financial reward to cover their “broken time” (time lost from their other work) and the risk of injury. The FA remained staunchly elitist in sustaining a policy of amateurism that protected upper and upper-middle class influence over the game.

The issue of professionalism reached a crisis in England in 1884, when the FA expelled two clubs for using professional players. However, the payment of players had become so commonplace by then that the FA had little option but to sanction the practice a year later, despite initial attempts to restrict professionalism to reimbursements for broken time. The consequence was that northern clubs, with their large supporter bases and capacity to attract better players, came to prominence. As the influence of working-class players rose in football, the upper classes took refuge in other sports, notably cricket and rugby union. Professionalism also sparked further modernization of the game through the establishment of the Football League, which allowed the leading dozen teams from the North and Midlands to compete systematically against each other from 1888 onward. A lower, second division was introduced in 1893, and the total number of teams increased to 28. The Irish and Scots formed leagues in 1890. The Southern League began in 1894 but was absorbed by the Football League in 1920. Yet football did not become a major profit-making business during this period. Professional clubs became limited liability companies primarily to secure land for gradual development of stadium facilities. Most clubs in England were owned and controlled by businessmen but shareholders received very low, if any, dividends; their main reward was an enhanced public status through running the local club.

Later national leagues overseas followed the British model, which included league championships, at least one annual cup competition, and a hierarchy of leagues that sent clubs finishing highest in the tables (standings) up to the next higher division (promotion) and clubs at the bottom down to the next lower division (relegation). A league was formed in the Netherlands in 1889, but professionalism arrived only in 1954. Germany completed its first national championship season in 1903, but the Bundesliga, a comprehensive and fully professional national league, did not evolve until 60 years later. In France, where the game was introduced in the 1870s, a professional league did not begin until 1932, shortly after professionalism had been adopted in the South American countries of Argentina and Brazil.

International organization
By the early 20th century, football had spread across Europe, but it was in need of international organization. A solution was found in 1904, when representatives from the football associations of Belgium, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland founded the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA).

2019 Asian Cup final
2019 Asian Cup finalHassan al-Haydos of Qatar in action against Takumi Minamino of Japan during the AFC Asian Cup final match between Japan and Qatar at Zayed Sports City Stadium on February 1, 2019, in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Although Englishman Daniel Woolfall was elected FIFA president in 1906 and all of the home nations (England, Scotland, Ireland, and Wales) were admitted as members by 1911, British football associations were disdainful of the new body. FIFA members accepted British control over the rules of football via the International Board, which had been established by the home nations in 1882. Nevertheless, in 1920 the British associations resigned their FIFA memberships after failing to persuade other members that Germany, Austria, and Hungary should be expelled following World War I. The British associations rejoined FIFA in 1924 but soon after insisted upon a very rigid definition of amateurism, notably for Olympic football. Other nations again failed to follow their lead, and the British resigned once more in 1928, remaining outside FIFA until 1946. When FIFA established the World Cup championship, British insouciance toward the international game continued. Without membership in FIFA, the British national teams were not invited to the first three competitions (1930, 1934, and 1938). For the next competition, held in 1950, FIFA ruled that the two best finishers in the British home nations tournament would qualify for World Cup play; England won, but Scotland (which finished second) chose not to compete for the World Cup.

Despite sometimes fractious international relations, football continued to rise in popularity. It made its official Olympic debut at the London Games in 1908, and it has since been played in each of the Summer Games (except for the 1932 Games in Los Angeles). FIFA also grew steadily—especially in the latter half of the 20th century, when it strengthened its standing as the game’s global authority and regulator of competition. Guinea became FIFA’s 100th member in 1961; at the turn of the 21st century, more than 200 nations were registered FIFA members, which is more than the number of countries that belong to the United Nations.

Carli Lloyd
Carli LloydCarli Lloyd (left) of the United States scoring a penalty goal during the semifinal match against Germany in the FIFA Women's World Cup at the Olympic Stadium in Montreal, June 30, 2015.
The World Cup finals remain football’s premier tournament, but other important tournaments have emerged under FIFA guidance. Two different tournaments for young players began in 1977 and 1985, and these became, respectively, the World Youth Championship (for those 20 years old and younger) and the Under-17 World Championship. Futsal, the world indoor five-a-side championship, started in 1989. Two years later the first Women’s World Cup was played in China. In 1992 FIFA opened the Olympic football tournament to players aged under 23 years, and four years later the first women’s Olympic football tournament was held. The World Club Championship debuted in Brazil in 2000. The Under-19 Women’s World Championship was inaugurated in 2002.

FIFA membership is open to all national associations. They must accept FIFA’s authority, observe the laws of football, and possess a suitable football infrastructure (i.e., facilities and internal organization). FIFA statutes require members to form continental confederations. The first of these, the Confederación Sudamericana de Fútbol (commonly known as CONMEBOL), was founded in South America in 1916. In 1954 the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) and the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) were established. Africa’s governing body, the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF), was founded in 1957. The Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF) followed four years later. The Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) appeared in 1966. These confederations may organize their own club, international, and youth tournaments, elect representatives to FIFA’s Executive Committee, and promote football in their specific continents as they see fit. In turn, all football players, agents, leagues, national associations, and confederations must recognize the authority of FIFA’s Arbitration Tribunal for Football, which effectively functions as football’s supreme court in serious disputes.

Until the early 1970s, control of FIFA (and thus of world football) was firmly in the hands of northern Europeans. Under the presidencies of the Englishmen Arthur Drewry (1955–61) and Stanley Rous (1961–74), FIFA adopted a rather conservative patrician relationship to the national and continental bodies. It survived on modest income from the World Cup finals, and relatively little was done to promote football in developing countries or to explore the game’s business potential within the West’s postwar economic boom. FIFA’s leadership was more concerned with matters of regulation, such as confirming amateur status for Olympic competition or banning those associated with illegal transfers of players with existing contracts. For example, Colombia (1951–54) and Australia (1960–63) were suspended temporarily from FIFA after permitting clubs to recruit players who had broken contracts elsewhere in the world.

Growing African and Asian membership within FIFA undermined European control. In 1974 Brazilian João Havelange was elected president, gaining large support from developing nations. Under Havelange, FIFA was transformed from an international gentlemen’s club into a global corporation: billion-dollar television deals and partnerships with major transnational corporations were established during the 1980s and ’90s. While some earnings were reinvested through FIFA development projects—primarily in Asia, Africa, and Central America—the biggest political reward for developing countries has been the expansion of the World Cup finals to include more countries from outside Europe and South America.

Diego Maradona
Diego MaradonaDiego Maradona (right) of Argentina and a South Korean defender in a 1986 World Cup football (soccer) game.
Greater professionalization of sports also forced FIFA to intercede in new areas as a governing body and competition regulator. The use of performance-enhancing drugs by teams and individual players had been suspected since at least the 1930s; FIFA introduced drug tests in 1966, and occasionally drug users were uncovered, such as Willie Johnston of Scotland at the 1978 World Cup finals. But FIFA regulations were tightened in the 1980s after the sharp rise in offenses among Olympic athletes, the appearance of new drugs such as the steroid nandrolone, and the use of drugs by stars such as Argentina’s Diego Maradona in 1994. While FIFA has authorized lengthy worldwide bans of players who fail drug tests, discrepancies remain between nations and confederations over the intensity of testing and the legal status of specific drugs.

Sepp Blatter
Sepp BlatterFIFA president Sepp Blatter, 2006.
As the sport moved into the 21st century, FIFA came under pressure to respond to some of the major consequences of globalization for international football. During the corrupt tenure of Switzerland’s Sepp Blatter as president from 1998 to 2015, the political bargaining and wrangling among world football’s officials gained greater media and public attention. Direct conflicts of interest among football’s various groups have also arisen: players, agents, television networks, competition sponsors, clubs, national bodies, continental associations, and FIFA all have divergent views regarding the staging of football tournaments and the distribution of football’s income. Regulation of player representatives and transfers is also problematic. In UEFA countries, players move freely when not under contract. On other continents, notably Africa and Central and South America, players tend to be tied into long-term contracts with clubs that can control their entire careers. FIFA now requires all agents to be licensed and to pass written examinations held by national associations, but there is little global consistency regarding the control of agent powers. In Europe, agents have played a key role in promoting wage inflation and higher player mobility. In Latin America, players are often partially “owned” by agents who may decide on whether transfers proceed. In parts of Africa, some European agents have been compared to slave traders in the way that they exercise authoritarian control over players and profit hugely from transfer fees to Western leagues with little thought for their clients’ well-being. In this way, the ever-widening inequalities between developed and developing nations are reflected in the uneven growth and variable regulations of world football.

England and Scotland had the first leagues, but clubs sprang up in most European nations in the 1890s and 1900s, enabling these nations to found their own leagues. Many Scottish professional players migrated south to join English clubs, introducing English players and audiences to more-advanced ball-playing skills and to the benefits of teamwork and passing. Up to World War II, the British continued to influence football’s development through regular club tours overseas and the Continental coaching careers of former players. Itinerant Scots were particularly prominent in central Europe. The interwar Danubian school of football emerged from the coaching legacies and expertise of John Madden in Prague and Jimmy Hogan in Austria.

Before World War II, Italian, Austrian, Swiss, and Hungarian teams emerged as particularly strong challengers to the British. During the 1930s, Italian clubs and the Italian national team recruited high-caliber players from South America (mainly Argentina and Uruguay), often claiming that these rimpatriati were essentially Italian in nationality; the great Argentinians Raimondo Orsi and Enrique Guaita were particularly useful acquisitions. But only after World War II was the preeminence of the home nations (notably England) unquestionably usurped by overseas teams. In 1950 England lost to the United States at the World Cup finals in Brazil. Most devastating were later, crushing losses to Hungary: 6–3 in 1953 at London’s Wembley Stadium, then 7–1 in Budapest a year later. The “Magical Magyars” opened English eyes to the dynamic attacking and tactically advanced football played on the Continent and to the technical superiority of players such as Ferenc Puskás, József Bozsik, and Nándor Hidegkuti. During the 1950s and ’60s, Italian and Spanish clubs were the most active in the recruitment of top foreign players. For example, the Welshman John Charles, known as “the Gentle Giant,” remains a hero for supporters of the Juventus club of Turin, Italy, while the later success of Real Madrid was built largely on the play of Argentinian Alfredo Di Stéfano and the Hungarian Puskás.

European football has also reflected the wider political, economic, and cultural changes of modern times. Heightened nationalism and xenophobia have pervaded matches, often as a harbinger of future hostilities. During the 1930s, international matches in Europe were often seen as national tests of physical and military capability. In contrast, football’s early post-World War II boom witnessed massive, well-behaved crowds that coincided with Europe’s shift from warfare to rebuilding projects and greater internationalism. More recently, racism became a more prominent feature of football, particularly during the 1970s and early 1980s: many coaches projected negative stereotypes onto Black players; supporters routinely abused nonwhites on and off the fields of play; and football authorities failed to counteract racist incidents at games. In general terms, racism at football reflected wider social problems across western Europe. In postcommunist eastern Europe, economic decline and rising nationalist sentiments have marked football culture too. The tensions that exploded in Yugoslavia’s civil war were foreshadowed during a match in May 1990 between the Serbian side Red Star Belgrade and the Croatian team Dynamo Zagreb when violence involving rival supporters and Serbian riot police spread to the pitch to include players and coaches.

Wayne Rooney
Wayne RooneyEngland's Wayne Rooney in action against Portugal during a FIFA World Cup quarter-final match against Portugal in Gelsenkirchen, Germany, July 1, 2006.
Club football reflects the distinctive political and cultural complexities of European regions. In Britain, partisan football has been traditionally associated with the industrial working class, notably in cities such as Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, and Newcastle. In Spain, clubs such as FC Barcelona and Athletic Bilbao are symbols of strong nationalist identity for Catalans and Basques, respectively. In France, many clubs have facilities that are open to the local community and reflect the nation’s corporatist politics in being jointly owned and administered by private investors and local governments. In Italy, clubs such as Fiorentina, Inter Milan, SSC Napoli, and AS Roma embody deep senses of civic and regional pride that predate Italian unification in the 19th century.

Zinedine Zidane
Zinedine ZidaneZinedine Zidane of France being pursued by Andrea Pirlo of Italy during the FIFA World Cup Germany final match between Italy and France at Olympic Stadium in Berlin on July 9, 2006.
The dominant forces in European national football have been Germany, Italy, and, latterly, France; their national teams have won a total of ten World Cups and seven European Championships. Success in club football has been built largely on recruitment of the world’s leading players, notably by Italian and Spanish sides. The European Cup competition for national league champions, first played in 1955, was initially dominated by Real Madrid; other regular winners have been AC Milan, Bayern Munich (Germany), Ajax of Amsterdam, and Liverpool FC (England). The UEFA Cup, first contested as the Fairs Cup in 1955–58, has had a wider pool of entrants and winners.

Serena Williams poses with the Daphne Akhurst Trophy after winning the Women's Singles final against Venus Williams of the United States on day 13 of the 2017 Australian Open at Melbourne Park on January 28, 2017 in Melbourne, Australia. (tennis, sports)
Britannica Quiz
Great Moments in Sports Quiz
Since the late 1980s, topflight European football has generated increasing financial revenues from higher ticket prices, merchandise sales, sponsorship, advertising, and, in particular, television contracts. The top professionals and largest clubs have been the principal beneficiaries. UEFA has reinvented the European Cup as the Champions League, allowing the wealthiest clubs freer entry and more matches. In the early 1990s, Belgian player Jean-Marc Bosman sued the Belgian Football Association, challenging European football’s traditional rule that all transfers of players (including those without contracts) necessitate an agreement between the clubs in question, usually involving a transfer fee. Bosman had been prevented from joining a new club (US Dunkerque) by his old club (RC Liège). In 1995 the European courts upheld Bosman’s complaint, and at a stroke freed uncontracted European players to move between clubs without transfer fees. The bargaining power of players was strengthened greatly, enabling top stars to multiply their earnings with large salaries and signing bonuses. Warnings of the end of European football’s financial boom came when FIFA’s marketing agent, ISL, went bust in 2001; such major media investors in football as the Kirch Gruppe in Germany and ITV Digital in the United Kingdom collapsed a year later. Inevitably, the financial boom had exacerbated inequalities within the game, widening the gap between the top players, the largest clubs, and the wealthiest spectators and their counterparts in lower leagues and the developing world.

North and Central America and the Caribbean
Football was brought to North America in the 1860s, and by the mid-1880s informal matches had been contested by Canadian and American teams. It soon faced competition from other sports, including variant forms of football. In Canada, Scottish émigrés were particularly prominent in the game’s early development; however, Canadians subsequently turned to ice hockey as their national sport.

In the United States, gridiron football emerged early in the 20th century as the most popular sport. But, beyond elite universities and schools, soccer (as the sport is popularly called in the United States) was played widely in some cities with large immigrant populations such as Philadelphia, Chicago, Cleveland (Ohio), and St. Louis (Missouri), as well as New York City and Los Angeles after Hispanic migrations. The U.S. Soccer Federation formed in 1913, affiliated with FIFA, and sponsored competitions. Between the world wars, the United States attracted scores of European emigrants who played football for local teams sometimes sponsored by companies.

Football in Central America struggled to gain a significant foothold in competition against baseball. In Costa Rica, the football federation founded the national league championship in 1921, but subsequent development in the region was slower, with belated FIFA membership for countries such as El Salvador (1938), Nicaragua (1950), and Honduras (1951). In the Caribbean, football traditionally paled in popularity to cricket in former British colonies. In Jamaica, football was highly popular in urban townships, but it did not capture the imagination of the country until 1998, when the national team—featuring several players who had gained success in Britain and were dubbed the “Reggae Boyz”—qualified for the World Cup finals.

Pelé
PeléBrazilian footballer Pelé, c. 1958.
North American leagues and tournaments saw an infusion of professional players in 1967, beginning with the wholesale importation of foreign teams to represent American cities. The North American Soccer League (NASL) formed a year later and struggled until the New York Cosmos signed the Brazilian superstar Pelé in 1975. Other aging international stars soon followed, and crowds grew to European proportions, but a regular fan base remained elusive, and NASL folded in 1985. An indoor football tournament, founded in 1978, evolved into a league and flourished for a while but collapsed in 1992.

Mia Hamm
Mia HammAmerican football (soccer) player Mia Hamm (left).
In North America football did establish itself as the relatively less-violent alternative to gridiron football and as a more socially inclusive sport for women. It is particularly popular among college and high-school students across the United States. After hosting an entertaining World Cup finals in 1994, the United States possessed some 16 million football players nationwide, up to 40 percent of whom were female. In 1996 a new attempt at establishing a professional outdoor league was made. Major League Soccer (MLS) was more modest in ambition than NASL, being originally played in only 10 U.S. cities, with greater emphasis on local players and a relatively tight salary cap. The MLS proved to be the most successful American soccer league, expanding to 29 teams (with three in Canada) by 2024 while also signing a number of lucrative broadcasting deals with American television networks and some star players from European leagues, with Inter Miami’s signing of Lionel Messi being perhaps the best known example. The United States hosted and won the Women’s World Cup finals in 1999, attracting enthusiastic local support. The success of the MLS and the Women’s World Cup led to the creation of a women’s professional league in 2001. The Women’s United Soccer Association (WUSA) began with eight teams and featured the world’s star player, Mia Hamm, but it disbanded in 2003.

North American national associations are members of the continental body, CONCACAF, and Mexico is the traditional regional powerhouse. Mexico has won the CONCACAF Gold Cup nine times since it was first contested in 1991, and Mexican clubs have dominated the CONCACAF Champions Cup for clubs since it began in 1962. British influence in mining and railroads encouraged the founding of football clubs in Mexico in the late 19th century. A national league was established in 1903. Mexico is exceptional in that its mass preference for football runs counter to the sporting tastes of its North American neighbors. The national league system is the most commercially successful in the region and attracts players from all over the Western Hemisphere. Despite high summer humidity and stadiums at high elevations, Mexico has hosted two of the most memorable World Cup finals, in 1970 and 1986, from which Brazil and Argentina (led by the game’s then greatest players, Pelé and Maradona, respectively) emerged as the respective winners. While the national team has been ranked highly by FIFA, often figuring in the top ten, Mexico initially did not produce the world-class caliber of players expected of such a large football-crazed nation. Hugo Sanchez (at Real Madrid) was the only Mexican player to reach the highest world level in the 20th century, but the 21st saw a number of Mexican standouts excel with top European clubs.

Richard C. Giulianotti
South America
Football first came to South America in the 19th century through the port of Buenos Aires, Argentina, where European sailors played the game. Members of the British community there formed the first club, the Buenos Aires Football Club (FC), in 1867; about the same time, British railway workers started another club, in the town of Rosario, Argentina. The first Argentinian league championship was played in 1893, but most of the players belonged to the British community, a pattern that continued until the early 20th century.

Brazil is believed to be the second South American country where the game was established. Charles Miller, a leading player in England, came to Brazil in 1894 and introduced football in São Paulo; that city’s athletic club was the first to take up the sport. In Colombia, British engineers and workers building a railroad near Barranquilla first played football in 1903, and the Barranquilla FBC was founded in 1909. In Uruguay, British railway workers were the first to play, and in 1891 they founded the Central Uruguay Railway Cricket Club (now the famous Peñarol), which played both cricket and football. In Chile, British sailors initiated play in Valparaíso, establishing the Valparaíso FC in 1889. In Paraguay, Dutchman William Paats introduced the game at a school where he taught physical education, but the country’s first (and still leading) club, Olimpia, was formed by a local man who became enthusiastic after seeing the game in Buenos Aires in 1902. In Bolivia the first footballers were a Chilean and students who had studied in Europe, and in Peru they were expatriate Britons. In Venezuela, British miners are known to have played football in the 1880s.

Soon local people across South America began taking up and following the sport in ever greater numbers. Boys, mostly from poorer backgrounds, played from an early age, with passion, on vacant land and streets. Clubs and players gained popularity, and professionalism entered the sport in most countries around the 1930s—although many players had been paid secretly before then by their clubs. The exodus of South American players to European clubs that paid higher salaries began after the 1930 World Cup and has steadily increased.

By the late 1930s, football had become a crucial aspect of popular culture in many South American nations; ethnic and national identities were constructed and played out on an increasingly international stage. In South American nations, nonwhite players fought a successful struggle to play at the top level: in Rio de Janeiro, Vasco da Gama was the first club to recruit Black players and promptly stormed to the league championship in 1923, encouraging other clubs to follow suit. In Uruguay, a nation of largely mixed European descent, local players learned both the physical style played by the English and the more refined passing game of the Scots, producing a versatility that helped their national team win two Olympic championships and the World Cup between 1924 and 1930.

In 1916, South American countries were the first to hold a regular continental championship—later known as the Copa América. In 1960 the South American club championship (Libertadores Cup) was started; it has been played annually by the continent’s leading clubs (with the winner playing the European club champion), and, as a result of its popularity, various other international competitions have also been held between clubs. Domestic league championships are split into two or more tournaments each season with frequent variations in format.

European sailors, soldiers, traders, engineers, and missionaries brought football with them to Africa in the second half of the 19th century. The first documented match took place in Cape Town in 1862, after which the game spread rapidly throughout the continent, particularly in the British colonies and in societies with vibrant indigenous athletic traditions.

During the interwar period, African men in cities and towns, railroad workers, and students organized clubs, associations, and regional competitions. Teams from Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia competed in the North African championship, established in 1919, and vied for the North African Cup, introduced in 1930. South of the Sahara, Kenya and Uganda first played for the Gossage Trophy in 1924, and the Darugar Cup was established on the island of Zanzibar. In the mining center of Élisabethville (now Lubumbashi, Congo) a football league for Africans was begun in 1925. In South Africa the game was very popular by the early 1930s, though it was organized in racially segregated national associations for whites, Africans, Coloureds (persons of mixed race), and Indians. In the colonies of British West Africa, the Gold Coast (now Ghana) launched its first football association in 1922, with Nigeria’s southern capital of Lagos following suit in 1931. Enterprising clubs and leagues developed across French West Africa in the 1930s, especially in Senegal and Côte d’Ivoire. Moroccan forward Larbi Ben Barek became the first African professional in Europe, playing for Olympique de Marseille and the French national team in 1938.

After World War II football in Africa experienced dramatic expansion. Modernizing colonial regimes provided new facilities and created attractive competitions, such as the French West Africa Cup in 1947. The migration of talented Africans to European clubs intensified. Together with his elder compatriot Mario Coluña, Mozambican sensation Eusébio, European player of the year in 1965, starred for European champions Benfica of Lisbon and led Portugal to third place in the 1966 World Cup, where he was the tournament’s leading scorer. Algerian stars Rachid Mekhloufi of Saint-Étienne and Mustafa Zitouni of AS Monaco represented France before joining the team of the Algerian National Liberation Front (FLN) in 1958. The FLN eleven, who lost only 4 of 58 matches during the period 1958–62, embodied the close relations between nationalist movements and football in Africa on the eve of decolonization.

With colonialism’s hold on Africa slipping away, the Confédération Africaine de Football (CAF) was established in February 1957 in Khartoum, Sudan, with the first African Cup of Nations tournament also played at that time. Independent African states encouraged football as a means of forging a national identity and generating international recognition.

In the 1960s and early ’70s, African football earned a reputation for a spectacular, attacking style of play. African and European coaches emphasized craft, creativity, and fitness within solid but flexible tactical schemes. Salif Keita (Mali), Laurent Pokou (Côte d’Ivoire), and François M’Pelé (Congo [Brazzaville]) personified the dynamic qualities of football in postcolonial Africa.

In the late 1970s, the migration of talented players overseas began hampering domestic leagues. The effects of this player exodus were somewhat tempered by the rise of “scientific football” and defensive, risk-averting tactics, an international trend that saw African players fall out of favor with European clubs. Even so, the integration of Africa and Africans into world football accelerated in the 1980s and ’90s. Cameroon’s national team, known as the Indomitable Lions, was a driving force in this process. After being eliminated without losing a match at the 1982 World Cup in Spain (tied with Italy in its group, Cameroon lost the tiebreaker on the basis of total goals scored), Cameroon reached the quarterfinals at the 1990 World Cup in Italy, thereby catapulting African football into the global spotlight. Nigeria then captured the Olympic gold medal in men’s football at the Summer Games in Atlanta in 1996; in 2000 Cameroon won its first Olympic gold medal in men’s football at the Games in Sydney, Australia. Success also came at youth level as Nigeria (1985) and Ghana (1991 and 1995) claimed under-17 world titles. Moreover, Liberian striker George Weah of Paris St. Germain received the prestigious FIFA World Player of the Year award in 1995.

Michael Essien
Michael EssienMichael Essien of Ghana jumping high for a header during a FIFA World Cup match against the United States in Nürnberg, Germany, on June 22, 2006.
In recognition of African football’s success and influence, FIFA awarded Africa five places in the 32-team 1998 World Cup finals. This achievement bore witness to African football’s phenomenal passion, growth, and development. This rich and complex history is made more remarkable by the continent’s struggles to cope with a fragile environment, scarce material resources, political conflicts, and the unpleasant legacy of imperialism.

Peter Christopher Alegi
Asia and Oceania
Football quickly entered Asia and Oceania in the latter half of the 19th century, but, unlike in Europe, it failed to become a unifying national sport. In Australia it could not dislodge the winter games of Australian rules football (codified before soccer) and rugby. British immigrants to Australia did relatively little to develop football locally. Because southern European immigrants were more committed to founding clubs and tournaments, football became defined as an “ethnic game.” As a result, teams from Melbourne and Sydney with distinctive Mediterranean connections were the most prominent members of the National Soccer League (NSL) when it started in 1977. The league has widened its scope, however, to include a highly successful Perth side, plus a Brisbane club and even one from Auckland, New Zealand. The NSL collapsed in 2004, but a new league, known as the A-League, emerged the next year.

In New Zealand, Scottish players established clubs and tournaments from the 1880s, but rugby became the national passion. In Asia, during the same germinal period, British traders, engineers, and teachers set up football clubs in such colonial outposts as Shanghai, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Burma (Myanmar). Yet football’s major problem across Asia, until the 1980s, was its failure to establish substantial roots among indigenous peoples beyond college students returning from Europe. Football in India was particularly prominent in Calcutta (Kolkata) among British soldiers, but locals soon adopted cricket. In Japan, Yokohama and Kobe housed large numbers of football-playing foreigners, but local people retained preferences for the traditional sport of sumo wrestling and the imported game of baseball.

At the turn of the 21st century, football became increasingly important in Asian societies. In Iran, national team football matches became opportunities for many to express their reformist political views as well as for broad public celebration. The Iraqi men’s team’s fourth-place finish at the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens struck a chord of hope for their war-torn homeland.

The Asian game is organized by the Asian Football Confederation, comprising 47 members and stretching geographically from Lebanon in the Middle East to Guam in the western Pacific Ocean. The Asian Cup for national teams has been held quadrennially since 1956; Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Japan have dominated, with South Korea a regular runner-up. These countries have also produced the most frequent winners of the annual Asian Club Championship, first contested in 1967.

Asian economic growth during the 1980s and early 1990s and greater cultural ties to the West helped cultivate club football. Japan’s J-League was launched in 1993, attracting strong public interest and a sprinkling of famous foreign players and coaches (notably from South America). Attendance and revenue declined from 1995, but the league survived and was reorganized into two divisions of 16 and 10 clubs, respectively, by 1999. The league grew to 30 teams by 2005 but had reduced to 18 by 2018. In 2024 there were 20 J-League teams.

Some memorable international moments have indicated the potential of football in Asia and Oceania. Asia’s first notable success was North Korea’s stunning defeat of Italy at the 1966 World Cup finals. In 1994 Saudi Arabia became the first Asian team to qualify for the World Cup’s second round. The entertaining 2002 World Cup hosted by Japan and South Korea and the on-field success of the host nations’ national teams (South Korea reached the semifinals; Japan reached the second round) stood as the region’s brightest accomplishment in international football.

Sawa Homare
Sawa HomareSawa Homare of INAC Kobe Leonessa in action during the Nadeshiko League football (soccer) match between INAC Kobe Leonessa and JEF United Ichihara Chiba Ladies at Home's Stadium Kobe in Kobe, Japan, July 24, 2011.
Football’s future in Asia and Oceania depends largely upon regular competition with top international teams and players. Increased representation in the World Cup finals has helped development of the sport in the region. Meanwhile, domestic club competitions across Asia and Oceania have been weakened by the need for top national players to join better clubs in Europe or South America to test and improve their talents at a markedly higher level. Qatar hosted the 2022 World Cup, which was the first World Cup held in the Middle East.

Spectator problems
The spread of football throughout the globe has brought together people from diverse cultures in celebration of a shared passion for the game, but it has also spawned a worldwide epidemic of spectator hooliganism. High emotions that sometimes escalate into violence, both on and off the field, have always been a part of the game, but concern with fan violence and hooliganism has intensified since the 1960s. The early focus of this concern was British fans, but the development of the anti-hooligan architecture of football grounds around the world points to the international scope of the problem. Stadiums in Latin America are constructed with moats and high fences. Many grounds in Europe now ban alcohol and no longer offer sections where fans can stand; those “terraces,” which charged lower admission than ticketed seating, were the traditional flash points of fan violence.

Heysel Stadium disaster
Heysel Stadium disasterFootball (soccer) spectators at Heysel Stadium in Brussels fleeing violence after Liverpool fans attacked Juventus supporters before a match between the two clubs, May 29, 1985.
Some of the first modern hooligan groups were found in Scotland, where religious sectarianism arose among the supporters of two Glasgow teams: Rangers, whose fans were predominantly Protestant unionists, and Celtic, whose fans were drawn largely from the city’s sizable Irish Catholic community. Between the World Wars, “razor gangs” fought street battles when these two clubs met. Since the late 1960s, however, English fan hooliganism has been even more notorious, especially when English supporters have followed their teams overseas. The nadir of fan violence came during the mid-1980s. At the European Cup final in 1985 between Liverpool and the Italian club Juventus at Heysel Stadium in Brussels, 39 fans (38 Italian, 1 Belgian) died and more than 400 were injured when, as Liverpool supporters charged opposing fans, a stadium wall collapsed under the pressure of those fleeing. In response, English clubs were banned from European competition until 1990, but by then hooliganism had become established in many other European countries. By the turn of the 21st century, self-identifying hooligans could be found among German, Dutch, Belgian, and Scottish supporters. Elsewhere, militant fans included the ultras in Italy and southern France, and the various hinchadas of Spain and Latin America, whose levels of violence varied from club to club. Argentina has experienced perhaps the worst consequences, with an estimated 148 deaths between 1939 and 2003 from violent incidents that often involved security forces.

The causes of football hooliganism are numerous and vary according to the political and cultural context. High levels of alcohol consumption can exaggerate supporter feelings and influence aggression, but this is neither the single nor the most important cause of hooliganism, given that many heavily intoxicated fans instead behave gregariously. In northern Europe fan violence has acquired an increasingly subcultural dimension. At major tournaments, self-identifying hooligans sometimes can spend weeks pursuing their distinctive peers among opposing supporters to engage in violence; the most successful combatants earn status within the subcultural network of hooligan groups. Research in Britain suggests these groups do not hail from society’s poorest members but usually from more-affluent working-class and lower middle-class backgrounds, depending upon regional characteristics. In southern Europe, notably in Italy, spectator violence can also reflect deep-seated cultural rivalries and tensions, especially between neighboring cities or across the divide between north and south. In Latin America fan violence has been understood in relation to the modern politics of dictatorship and repressive state methods of social control. Moreover, the upsurge in violence in Argentina beginning in the late 1990s has been explained according to the severe decline of the national economy and the political system.

In some circumstances, football hooliganism has forced politicians and the judiciary to intercede directly. In England the Conservative government of the 1980s targeted football hooligans with legislation, and the subsequent Labour administration unveiled further measures to control spectator behavior inside stadiums. In Argentina, football matches were briefly suspended by the courts in 1999 in a bid to halt the violence. Football authorities have also recognized fan violence as a major impediment to the game’s economic and social health. In England attempts at reducing hooliganism have included all-seated stadiums and the creation of family-only stands. These measures have helped attract new, wealthier spectators, but critics have argued that the new policies have also diminished the color and atmosphere at football grounds. More liberal anti-hooligan strategies encourage dialogue with supporters: the “fan projects” run by clubs and local authorities in Germany, the Netherlands, and Sweden are the strongest illustrations of this approach.

Still, the major threats to spectator safety tend to involve not fighting among supporters but rather a mixture of factors such as disorderly crowd responses to play in the match, unsafe facilities, and poor crowd-control techniques. In the developing world, crowd stampedes have caused many disasters, such as the 126 deaths in Ghana in 2001. Police attempts to quell disorderly crowds can backfire and exacerbate the dangers, as was the case in Peru in 1964 when 318 died and in Zimbabwe in 2000 when 13 died. Disastrous crowd management strategies and facilities that some have characterized as inhumane were at the root of the tragedy in Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, England, in 1989, in which 96 were fatally injured when they were crushed inside the football ground.

It would be quite wrong, however, to portray the vast majority of football fans as inherently violent or xenophobic. Since the 1980s, organized supporter groups, along with football authorities and players, have waged both local and international campaigns against racism and (to a lesser extent) sexism within the game. Football supporters with the most positive, gregarious reputations—such as those following the Danish, Irish, and Brazilian national sides—tend to engage in self-policing within their own ranks, with few calls for outside assistance. As part of their Fair Play campaigns, international football bodies have introduced awards for the best-behaved supporters at major tournaments. In more challenging circumstances, English fan organizations such as the Football Supporters’ Federation have sought to improve the behavior of their compatriots at matches overseas by planning meetings with local police officials and introducing “fan embassies” for visiting supporters. Across Europe, international fan networks have grown up to combat the racism that has also been reflected in some hooliganism. More generally, since the mid-1980s, the production of fanzines (fan magazines) across Britain and some other parts of Europe have served to promote the view that football fans are passionate, critical, humorous, and (for the great majority) not at all violent. Such fanzines have been supplemented by—and in many ways surpassed by—Internet fan sites in the 21st century.

Richard C. Giulianotti
Play of the game
The rules of football regarding equipment, field of play, conduct of participants, and settling of results are built around 17 laws. The International Football Association Board (IFAB), consisting of delegates from FIFA and the four football associations from the United Kingdom, is empowered to amend the laws. Modifications to the laws regarding the size of the field, ball, and goal, as well as the duration of the game, the use of return substitutes, and the use of temporary dismissals may be made for youth, senior, and disabled players and in grassroots or amateur football.

Equipment and field of play
football (soccer) field
1 of 2
football (soccer) fieldA professional football (soccer) pitch with measurements of the respective zones. The length of the sides of the field may vary, but other measurements are fixed.
The chemistry behind a World Cup soccer ball2 of 2
The chemistry behind a World Cup soccer ballExplore the chemistry of the football (soccer ball) used in the 2014 World Cup.
See all videos for this article
The object of football is to maneuver the ball into the opposing team’s goal, using any part of the body except the hands and arms. The side scoring more goals wins. The ball is spherical, covered with leather or some other suitable material, and inflated to a pressure equal to 0.6–1.1 atmospheres (8.5–15.6 pounds per square inch [600–1,100 grams per square cm]) at sea level; it must be 27–28 inches (68–70 cm) in circumference and 14–16 ounces (410–450 grams) in weight. A game lasts 90 minutes and is divided into two halves; the halftime interval lasts as long as 15 minutes, during which the teams change ends of the field. Additional time may be added to each half by the referee to compensate for stoppages in play (for example, player injuries). If neither side wins, and if a victor must be established, two equal periods of extra time as long as 15 minutes are played, and then, if a winner is still not established, a series of penalty kicks (shoot-out) may be taken.

The playing field (pitch) should be 100–130 yards (90–120 meters) long and 50–100 yards (45–90 meters) wide; for international matches, it must be 110–120 yards (100–110 meters) long and 70–80 yards (64–75 meters) wide. A goal is located at the center of each short side of the field, set so that each of its vertical posts is the same distance from its respective corner of the field. The goal is a three-sided frame typically backed by a net and measuring 8 yards (7.3 meters) wide and 8 feet (2.4 meters) high. The penalty area, the large rectangular area in front of the goal in which the goalkeeper is allowed to use hands and arms to handle the ball, is 44 yards (40.2 meters) wide and extends 18 yards (16.5 meters) into the field. Inside this box 12 yards (11 meters) from the midpoint of the goal is a penalty mark. The smaller rectangle within the penalty area is the goal area, which measures 20 yards (18.3 meters) wide and 6 yards (5.5 meters) long. The game is controlled by a referee, who is also the timekeeper, and two assistants who patrol the touchlines, or sidelines, signaling when the ball goes out of play and when players are offside.

Players wear jerseys with numbers, shorts, and socks that designate the team for whom they are playing. Shoes and shin guards must be worn. The two teams must wear identifiably different uniforms, and goalkeepers must be distinguishable from all players and match officials.

Fouls
Penalty kick
Penalty kickFootball player preparing to take a free kick.
Free kicks are awarded for fouls or violations of rules; when a free kick is taken, all players of the offending side must be at least 10 yards (9.15 meters) from the ball. Free kicks may be either direct (from which a goal may be scored), for more serious fouls, or indirect (from which a goal cannot be scored), for lesser violations. Penalty kicks, introduced in 1891, are awarded for more serious fouls committed inside the area. The penalty kick is a direct free kick awarded to the attacking side and is taken from a spot 12 yards (11 meters) from goal, with all players other than the defending goalkeeper and the kicker outside the penalty area. Since 1970, players guilty of a serious foul are given a yellow caution card; a second caution earns a red card and ejection from the game. Players may also be sent off directly for particularly serious fouls, such as violent conduct.

Rules
There were few major alterations to football’s laws through the 20th century. Indeed, until the changes of the 1990s, the most significant amendment to the rules came in 1925, when the offside rule was rewritten. Previously, an attacking player (i.e., one in the opponent’s half of the playing field) was offside if, when the ball was “played” to him, fewer than three opposing players were between him and the goal. The rule change, which reduced the required number of intervening players to two, was effective in promoting more goals. In response, new defensive tactics and team formations emerged. Player substitutions were introduced in 1965; teams have been allowed to field three substitutes since 1995.

More recent rule changes have helped increase the tempo, attacking incidents, and amount of effective play in games. The pass-back rule now prohibits goalkeepers from handling the ball after it is kicked to them by a teammate. “Professional fouls,” which are deliberately committed to prevent opponents from scoring, are punished by red cards, as is tackling (taking the ball away from a player by kicking or stopping it with one’s feet) from behind. Players are cautioned for “diving” (feigning being fouled) to win free kicks or penalties. Time wasting has been addressed by forcing goalkeepers to clear the ball from hand within six seconds and by having injured players removed by stretcher from the pitch. Finally, the offside rule was adjusted to allow attackers who are level with the penultimate defender to be onside.
Guess what my friends? We’ve seen that before, and we do not want to see that again.

Alexi Lalas is a soccer analyst for FOX Sports and host of "Alexi Lalas' State of the Union Podcast." He represented the USMNT at the 1994 FIFA World Cup and had a nine-year professional career. In 2006, he became the president of the LA Galaxy and helped bring David Beckham to Major League Soccer.

Tyler Adams, Gio Reyna highlight USMNT roster for Nations League finals
Tyler Adams and Gio Reyna will participate in their first U.S. national team camp under Mauricio Pochettiino as  the coach named the 2022 World Cup veterans to his 23-man roster for next week's Concacaf Nations League finals in Los Angeles.

Usual USMNT headliners Christian Pulisic, Weston McKennie and Tim Weah were also included alongside Adams and Reyna, who were injured for Pochettino's first two camps after the former Chelsea, Paris Saint-Germain and Tottenham manager was hired last September. The Americans will face Panama in next Thursday's semifinal at SoFi Stadium, with the winner advancing to the March 23rd final there against either Canada or Mexico.

The U.S. is looking to add a fourth consecutive Nations League title after lifting the trophy in 2021, 2023 and last year.

"This is a massive opportunity to win a trophy and that is our clear objective," Pochettino said in a press release. "We must continue to show our quality, our bravery and our commitment to each other. We have an important moment to represent our country and our supporters, and we are very excited for this opportunity." 

Here's the full roster, followed by three quick thoughts and quotes from Pochettino's Monday afternoon conference call with reporters. 

Goalkeepers: Patrick Schulte, Columbus Crew (MLS); Zack Steffen, Colorado Rapids (MLS); Matt Turner, Crystal Palace (England)

Defenders: Cameron Carter-Vickers, Celtic (Scotland); Marlon Fossey, Standard Liege (Belgium); Mark McKenzie, Toulouse (France); Tim Ream, Charlotte FC (MLS); Chris Richards, Crystal Palace ; Antonee "Jedi" Robinson, Fulham (England); Miles Robinson, Cincinnati (MLS); Joe Scally, Borussia Mönchengladbach (Germany); Auston Trusty, Celtic

Midfiedlers: Tyler Adams, Bournemouth (England); Johnny Cardoso, Real Betis (Spain); Diego Luna, Real Salt Lake (MLS); Weston McKennie, Juventus (Italy); Gio Reyna, Borussia Dortmund (Germany); Tanner Tessmann, Lyon (France); 

Forwards:  Patrick Agyemang, Charlotte (MLS); Yunus Musah, AC Milan (Italy); Christian Pulisic, AC Milan; Josh Sargent, Norwich City (England); Timothy Weah, Juventus; Brian White, Vancouver Whitecaps (MLS)

Reyna gets the call despite his lack of club minutes 
Adams, who scored the game-winning goal in last year's championship match versus Mexico, was a shoo-in for this squad following his return to fitness following back surgery. The American captain at Qatar 2022, Adams has been at the height of his powers for Premier League Bournemouth, which is on pace for a top-half finish this season.

"It's great to have him," Pochettino said of Adams. "In the last months he was performing really, really well with his team, Bournemouth … it's a great opportunity for us to [get to] know him."

Reyna's inclusion, meantime, wasn't necessarily a sure thing. The 22-year-old has played sparingly for Borussia Dortmund since returning from a groin strain that sidelined him for all of September and October. He's logged just 541 minutes all season and was an unused substitute in the Black & Yellow's most recent match in the Bundesliga.

But Reyna remains one of the Americans' most talented attackers, and he's owned the Nations League in years past, scoring in all three previous editions. He was named the tournament's top player last year.

"It's true that maybe he's not playing too much but I think for us, he's a great player," the coach said when FOX Sports asked about Reyna's struggles at club level. "We want to win this competition and he can help. That is why he's with us. But at the same time, I think he can do better."

There was also a practical consideration when it came to Reyna. With Dortmund scheduled to particpate in this summer's FIFA Club World Cup, Reyna won't be available to the national team for the simultaneously-staged Concacaf Gold Cup if he's still with the German titan. 

"If not, it's going to be difficult to see him," said Pochettino. "it's important to create this relationship for the future." 

Poch rewards Carter-Vickers, Trusty and January campers
After recovering from injury, central defender Cameron Carter-Vickers, who briefly played for the Argentine at Tottenham, is the only other callup who will be participating in his first camp under Pochettino. The experienced 27-year-old, another World Cup vet, helped Celtic reach the knockout stage of the Champions League, where he and fellow center back Trusty then nearly helped the Scottish side upset Bayern Munich. Those performances clearly didn't go unnoticed.

Pochettino also rewarded six members of his January camp squad with invitations this month — including Diego Luna and Brian White (who combined on the game-winning goal against Costa Rica) and Patrick Agyemang (who scored in that game and in his USMNT debut versus Venezuela).

WIth just three training sessions before the March 20 opener versus Los Canaleros, continuity is important. Everyone must be able to hit the ground running. 

"It's important for us to have players that we already know and who already have been working with us," Pochettino said. 

No room for Zendejas, Brenden Aaronson or Miles Robinson 
Aaronson has been a U.S. regular for most of the last four years. But he was among a number of regulars left off Pochettino's list this month. The others are Robinson, who had started three of the new coach's first six games at the helm, and Alex Zendejas, who has been tearing up the Mexican league with Liga MX champ Club America.

All three had a case. Ultimately, it became a numbers game — even with normal roster locks like Folarin Balogun, Sergiño Dest, Ricardo Pepi and Malik Tillman all unavailable this month because of injury or, in Dest's case, having just returned from one. 

With just 23 spots available under Concacaf rules, there was also no place for Europe-based trio Gianluca Busio, Aidan Morris or Paxten Aaronson, Brenden's younger brother.

"We're disappointed because we cannot call all [of them]," Pochettino said. "The difficulty always when you have too many players is to be right.

"It's really painful because sometimes it's not only the performance, it's the balance," he added. "We selected these 23 players because we really believe that we can find a very good balance and compete in our best way to win." 

Doug McIntyre is a soccer writer for FOX Sports who has covered the United States men's and women's national teams at FIFA World Cups on five continents. Follow him at @ByDougMcIntyre.

Panama defeat conjures memories of USMNT’s most devastating losses
Christian Pulisic in the USMNT&#039;s loss to Trinidad &amp; Tobago
By Pablo Maurer
6

March 22, 2025 1:00 pm GMT+1
The U.S. men’s national team’s 1-0 loss to Panama in the Concacaf Nations League semifinals was unquestionably a humiliating one. The USMNT, replete with stars playing abroad and coached by the reputable Mauricio Pochettino, looked listless against the Panamanians. Despite the fact that Panama has now beaten the Americans three times in the last 20 months, the result still felt like a gut-punch to the U.S. – the program and its fans.

Not that many of them watched the match in person. Just before the anthems on Thursday, U.S. star Christian Pulisic was spotted grimacing at the large swaths of empty seats around SoFi Stadium. The dour atmosphere – it didn’t help that it was a 4 p.m. local time kickoff outside Los Angeles – only added to the heartburn surrounding the result. A significantly larger crowd turned up for the second match of the day, between Mexico and Canada.

Pochettino spent much of the run-up to the game doing media, offering bold predictions that the USMNT were real contenders to win the World Cup in 2026, which is a little over a year away. In other interviews, he spoke of returning to the EPL some day and yearned for a conversation with U.S. President Donald Trump. The Argentine is charming, for certain, but his guile will mean nothing if he can’t accomplish his stated goals. He was brought in in large part to motivate this “golden generation” of U.S. players, but very few of them looked committed or golden on Thursday night.

The loss is unquestionably the poorest result of Pochettino’s seven-match tenure to date, and the U.S. still has a chance to save a bit of face against Canada in the third-place game. A loss in that match, which certainly feels possible, would only add to the misery surrounding the USMNT’s recent performances, and with time running short when it comes to galvanizing the country around the sport and program, results like Thursday’s come with some added layers.

Perspective is important, though, and even a fourth-place finish in a Concacaf Nations League wouldn’t hold a candle to some of the U.S. men’s most devastating previous failures, ones that had massive consequences. If you’re the kind of fan that likes to lean into your grief, then keep reading.

Costa Rica 1, USMNT 0; May 31, 1985
By the time the USMNT’s final qualifier of the 1986 World Cup cycle rolled around, the whole of American soccer was in a tailspin. The North American Soccer League (NASL) — the first real, top-flight league in U.S. history — had closed up shop permanently just two months earlier. The national team was largely made up of players from the Major Indoor Soccer League, and they rarely played the outdoor game, outside of national team call-ups. Some team members even played in semi-professional leagues and held part-time jobs.

Mexico, the dominant team in the region for decades, had already qualified for the 1986 World Cup as the host nation. In an era where only two teams from Concacaf qualified, the USMNT was looked upon as a favorite to advance. It needed only a draw against Costa Rica to advance to the next round of qualifying and take a step closer to a first World Cup berth since 1950.

The NASL’s collapse and public apathy toward the sport put the U.S. Soccer Federation in a bind and made ticket sales an essential revenue stream. Consequential matches in the U.S, even World Cup qualifiers, frequently felt like away games, with crowds full of immigrants from Latin American countries. Such was the case against Costa Rica.

“There was an agent that represented some of the (Costa Rican) players,” remembered USMNT’s Perry Van der Beck. “The federation sold this game to him. The stadium was just full of Costa Ricans — the halftime show, even, was just full of Costa Rican music, all aimed at the Costa Rican fans.”

The U.S. was led by head coach Alkis Panagoulias. Born in Greece, Panagoulias was a “token offering,” remembers former USMNT defender Alan Merrick, “who truly believed that the so-called ‘American spirit’ would carry us alone.” He was short of technical acumen and long on inspirational quotes.

“In this country, somewhere out there, maybe in Harlem or Los Angeles, there is the next Pelé,” Panagoulias once said. “And not just one — maybe 20 or 30.”



In the weeks before Mbappé enrolled himself in the ranks of Les Rouge-et-Bleu, Paris Saint-Germain had already broken the world transfer record on the day they met Neymar’s release clause, a prerequisite to prizing him from the grasps of Barcelona. The Brazilian joined for a fee in excess of £220m.

In the media’s eyes, this transfer somewhat took the shine off of Mbappé’s own move to Paris; his switch the dessert that follows a gluttonous main course. But, typically, the young attacker cared not. His move to Paris was born from a desire to make history on the pitch, not off of it.

To little surprise, Mbappé hit the ground running in Paris in every sense of the phrase. On 8 September 2018, the attacker struck a goal on his debut in a 5-1 walk in the park against Metz. Four days later, as thanks for being handed a first Champions League start for PSG, Mbappé chipped in with one of his side’s five goals against Celtic in another simple victory.

Just as he had at Monaco, Mbappé aided his fellow forwards in forming one of the world’s most feared offences. With his completing of an attacking trident, alongside Neymar and Cavani, in their six Champions League group stage fixtures alone his team struck 25 times. Having already secured progression, PSG fell to a 3-1 defeat away to Munich but, by that point, had since scored five, three, four, five and seven in their preceding five fixtures. The numbers racked up by PSG, in far from the most elementary of groups, was shamelessly audacious.

When Mbappé fired his team’s only goal of the game away to Bayern, on 5 December, another fine record fell into his lap. At the age of 18 years, 11 months and five days, the Frenchman had his 10th Champions League goal. For context, the record that was now his had most recently belonged to Karim Benzema who only grabbed his 10th goal in the Champions League when he was almost two years Mbappé’s senior. Lionel Messi, meanwhile, totalled his 10 more than three months after turning 21.

Eventually, PSG’s weekly steamrolling stopped. When confronted by the considerable might of Real Madrid, a 5-2 aggregate victory allowed the men in white to remind their Parisian counterparts just who were the kings of Europe. Mbappé, meanwhile, was afforded an unfortunate glimpse of life in Madrid, the life he could have had should he have accepted the first record-breaking transfer to arrive under his nose.

Nonetheless, their European disappointment did little to curtail PSG’s domestic progress and the capital club regained their Ligue 1 crown in style. They added their league title to the Coupe de France, Coupe de la Ligue and Trophée des Champions silverware already amassed during the same season. In total, Mbappé notched 21 goals in 43 games on the way to a domestic quadruple.

|  Where does Karim Benzema rank amongst the best of his generation?

Given the stunning influence he brought to his country’s under-19s side at the European Championships the year before, it was expected that Mbappé’s next international tournament outing would have been the 2017 FIFA Under-20s World Cup in South Korea. But delivering back-to-back league titles with alternate clubs demanded so much more and, by the eve of the aforementioned youth tournament, Mbappé had long since become a fully fledged member of the France senior team. Furthermore, Mbappé’s form had demanded he travel with them to the World Cup in Russia and his form also demanded he be seen as one of Les Blues’ most lethal weapons.

Mbappé had become France’s second youngest-ever debutant in March 2017, featuring sparingly against Luxembourg in a 2018 World Cup qualification match aged 18 years, three months and five days. Only Maryan Wisniewski, who debuted in 1955, had done so younger.

A little over five months on, Mbappé had his first goal for his country, scoring against the Netherlands in another World Cup qualifier. By the following May, the 19-year-old had successfully secured his seat on the plane departing for Moscow. He would, this confirmed, feature in some capacity in the quadrennial showpiece of world football. How great a role he would eventually play few could have dreamed up.

* * *

Paul Pogba slipped in and pickpocketed the ball from Peruvian captain, Paolo Guerrero. Sweeping the ball across the turf, his quick pass met the advancing run of Olivier Giroud. With his first touch, the Chelsea forward attempted a left-footed swipe towards goal but the shot was blocked by the outstretched leg of Alberto Rodríguez.

Having succeeded in not halting the ball but instead sending it skywards, Rodríguez’s deflection allowed the ball to loop over his goalkeeper and continue its goalbound path. Rushing in to ensure the job was completed without fault, Mbappé beat the scrambling goalkeeper to the drop and tapped the ball home. One-nil to France. A first strike of the tournament and another record for France’s youngest-ever World Cup goalscorer: the 19 years and 183 days old Mbappé.

The French had already squeezed beyond Australia in their tournament opener, in a narrow 2-1 victory, and, after defeating Peru by a solitary goal, were held to the competition’s only 0-0 draw with Denmark. They’d not set the world alight with their play but Les Blues had done enough to progress to the round of 16. There, they would meet Lionel Messi’s Argentina.

The pendulum swung wildly throughout the game; fortune favouring the Europeans, then the South Americans, then the Europeans again. Back and forth it went. Antoine Griezmann opened the scoring from the penalty spot, awarded after a panic-stricken Marcos Rojo had bundled the electric-heeled Mbappé to floor of the penalty area, before two goals either side of half-time – a stunning long-range strike from Ángel Di María and a deflected effort from Gabriel Mercado – put the Argentines in the driving seat. French auxiliary full-back Benjamin Pavard reclaimed parity, finding the top corner with a sumptuous half-volley that would later be voted the tournament’s finest goal, before Mbappé took it upon himself to decide the fate of the tie.

Striking twice in the space of just four minutes, Mbappé mercilessly finished two counter-attacks that ravaged a dizzied Argentina defence. Tucking the first under Franco Armani, having been teed up by a neat toe-poke into space from Giroud, Mbappé grabbed his second by working a yard of room in a crowded penalty area before smashing a low drive beyond Armani’s attempted dive. The full-time whistle brought the game to a halt with the score 4-2. France were into the quarter-finals.

Les Blues next orchestrated another mature performance in the following round, much needed in order to negotiate a 2-0 win from a difficult contest with Uruguay. Head coach Didier Deschamps had received criticism for stifling the attacking affluence available to him but, to his credit, he had instead focused on teaching his French ranks how to deploy the tactics necessary to overcome any opponent. Often flair was sacrificed in the name of pragmatism, and in the name of progression, and it worked. For their troubles, they were awarded a semi-final date with Belgium.

A similar story played out once again against Belgium. Try as they might, Les Rode Duivels couldn’t break down the French resistance – there was no white flag of France’s to be found – and Samuel Umtiti’s goal proved sufficient to carry his country into their third World Cup final. Croatia would meet them in Moscow.

France

In keeping with the entirety of the openly convention-defying tournament, the final would willingly do away with tradition on the goalscoring front. Not since 1986 had both finalists found the scoresheet twice or more and only those born to the early 1960s could remember a final that boasted as many as six goals. In every stadium in every Russian town and city, the tournament had found itself routinely punctuated by three distinct types of goal – penalties, own goals and screamers – and the final would buck no present trends in that particular regard.

The scoring opened with an own goal. The ball, sent into the area swirling by the left boot of Griezmann, found nobody but the scalp of Mario Mandžukić and, scarcely a second later, the back of the Croatian net. Ivan Perišić brought his country level with a well-worked solo effort but, before the half could expire, Griezmann had his say once again, this time from the penalty spot. A generous hand-ball decision, afforded by the video assistant referee, allowed France the opportunity to head into the break ahead, which they gladly took.

Midway into the second half, a howler from French captain Hugo Lloris allowed Mandžukić to find the net at the right end, opportunistically sneaking home a second Croatian goal, but by that point, France had already found their third and fourth of the evening.

The third came from Paul Pogba, a hard-earned rebound that capped a fine final showing of the tournament, while the fourth was all Mbappé’s: a slick right-footed slap from 25 yards that deceived his old teammate Danijel Subašić, tumbled into the bottom corner of the net, and secured for Mbappé likely the most remarkable of all his remarkable records to date. In that instant, he became only the second teenager ever to score in a World Cup final. The first had done so on 60 years earlier, on 29 June 1958, in the unforgettable final between Brazil and Sweden, and that particular teenager’s name was Pelé.

When asked if a World Cup triumph may sway future Ballon d’Or voters in his favour, Mbappé’s retort was typical of the focus and drive evidenced so regularly in his short career to date. “I couldn’t care less about that,” he assured his interviewer. “I want the World Cup. I want to sleep with it.”

On that champagne-soaked night, so long as he was able to wrestle the 18-carat gold trophy from the vicelike grasps of his equally infatuated compatriots, Mbappé was free to do just that. Though it may have paid to remind him that he no longer needed to sleep in order to hold the World Cup close to him. He was now a world champion for real. It was his to keep.

* * *

This summer, the unthinkable is happening: Lionel Messi is leaving Barcelona. It's the only club he's ever known as a professional, a place where he's won every trophy imaginable. But the relationship between Messi and Barcelona soured and last summer, he tried (and failed) to get out. This year, his contract expired on June 30 and despite every indication he would sign a new deal, financial constraints have forced Barcelona to abandon ship. Now that his move to Paris Saint-Germain has been confirmed, as we look back at his brilliant career for the Blaugrana. "In Barcelona, on Dec. 14, 2000, in the presence of [Josep Maria] Minguella and Horacio [Gaggioli], Carles Rexach, FC Barcelona's sporting director, hereby agrees, under his responsibility and regardless of any dissenting opinions, to sign the player Lionel Messi provided that we keep to the amounts agreed upon."
The above words, scribbled on a napkin following a game of tennis in Barcelona, were hastily written to assure Messi's father, Jorge, that the club was committed to signing his 13-year-old son. The game would never be the same.
Lionel Messi News: Soccer Star Is the Subject of a New Apple TV+ Docuseries
Apple TV+ is giving soccer fans more behind-the-scenes access to soccer star Lionel Messi and Argentina’s memorable 2022 World Cup championship in a new docuseries. Messi’s World Cup: The Rise of a Legend debuts on the streaming service February 21. The four-part series promises the most personal interviews to date with Messi and “an intimate and unprecedented look at his quest for a legacy-defining World Cup victory.” Messi, now playing for Inter Miami CF of the MLS, helped his home country win soccer’s biggest event for the first time since 1986, scoring two goals in the final and leading Argentina to a 4-2 win over Kylian Mbappé and France on penalties. Argentina’s captain was also named the tournament MVP.

The new series follows up Messi Meets America, Apple’s 2023 look at the star striker’s arrival and first season in the MLS. Inter Miami begins the 2024 regular season also on February 21 with a match against Real Salt Lake.Lionel Messi is an Argentinian soccer player who has played for FC Barcelona, Paris Saint-Germain, and currently, the MLS club Inter Miami CF as well as the Argentina national team. As a teenager, Messi moved from Argentina to Spain after FC Barcelona agreed to pay for medical treatments related to his growth hormone disorder. At the club, he earned renown as one of the greatest players in history, helping FC Barcelona win more than two dozen league titles and tournaments. In 2012, he set a record for most goals in a calendar year and, a decade later, helped the Argentina national team win its third FIFA World Cup. The eight-time Ballon d’Or winner moved to Paris Saint-Germain in 2021, and in July 2023, he joined Inter Miami.Luis Lionel Andres “Leo” Messi was born on June 24, 1987, in Rosario, Argentina. As a young boy, Messi tagged along when his two older brothers played soccer with their friends, unintimidated by the bigger boys. At the age of 8, he was recruited to join the youth system of Newell’s Old Boys, a Rosario-based club.

Recognizably smaller than most of the kids in his age group, Messi was eventually diagnosed by doctors as suffering from a hormone deficiency that restricted his growth. Messi’s parents, Jorge and Ceclia, decided on a regimen of nightly growth-hormone injections for their son, though it soon proved impossible to pay several hundred dollars per month for the medication.

So, at the age of 13, when Messi was offered the chance to train at soccer powerhouse FC Barcelona’s youth academy, La Masia, and have his medical bills covered by the team, Messi’s family picked up and moved across the Atlantic to make a new home in Spain. Although he was often homesick in his new country, Messi moved quickly through the junior system ranks.

Ultimately, Messi’s short stature—5 feet, 7 inches—combined with his speed and relentless attacking style, has drawn comparisons to another famous Argentinian footballer, Diego Maradona.
FC Barcelona forward Lionel Messi celebrates after scoring in a January 2006 match. He played for the club for 17 seasons.
At age 13, Messi signed with FC Barcelona. His first appearance for the team was when he was 16. On May 1, 2005, Messi put himself in the record books as the youngest player to ever score a goal for the franchise.

Messi steered Barcelona to a wealth of success, most notably in 2009, when the left-footer’s team captured the Champions League, La Liga, and Spanish Super Cup titles. That same year, after two consecutive runner-up finishes, he took home his first FIFA World Player of the Year honor, as well as his first Ballon d’Or award, the top European individual honor in football.

Messi became the first Argentinian player to win the Ballon d’Or. Even the great Maradona gushed about his fellow countryman. “I see him as very similar to me,” the retired player told the BBC. “He’s a leader and is offering lessons in beautiful football. He has something different than any other player in the world.”

Amazingly, the soccer wizard continued to improve, discovering new ways to elude defenders while leading Barcelona to La Liga and Spanish Super Cup championships in 2010 and 2011, as well as the ’11 Champions League title.

Messi embarked on an all-out assault on the record books in 2012. He became the first player to score five goals in a Champions League match in early March, and a few weeks later, he surpassed Cesar Rodriguez’s club-record 232 goals to become Barcelona’s all-time leading scorer. By the end of the year, Messi had accumulated an astounding 91 goals in club and international play, eclipsing the 85 netted in a single calendar year by Gerd Muller in 1972. Fittingly, he broke another record when he was named the Ballon d’Or winner for the fourth consecutive time.

In 2013, the soccer great came back to earth somewhat due to the persistence of hamstring injuries, but he regained his record-breaking form by becoming the all-time leading scorer in La Liga and Champions League play in late 2014.

After helping Barcelona achieve a historic second treble in 2015, he was honored with his fifth Ballon d’Or trophy. Four years later, following another La Liga title, Messi again established a new standard for excellence by claiming his sixth Ballon d’Or.

On August 5, 2021, FC Barcelona announced it couldn’t resign Messi due to the team’s budget constraints and La Liga restrictions. Despite having voiced his desire to leave the club the prior season, Messi bid a teary farewell after 17 seasons: “This is really difficult for me after so many years spent here, being here my entire life. I’m not ready for this.”
On June 7, 2023, Messi told two Spanish media outlets he planned to play for the MLS club Inter Miami CF, which is partially owned by former soccer player David Beckham. “I have made the decision that I am going to Miami,” Messi said at the time, per ESPN. Messi later told Time he strongly considered joining a Saudi Arabian team before deciding on Inter Miami.

A little over a month later, on July 16, the team officially welcomed him on a 2.5-year contract that runs through the 2025 season. The deal was reportedly worth around $150 million, including an annual salary between $50 million and $60 million, a signing bonus, revenue sharing with the league’s media partner, and team equity upon retirement.
In summer 2005, Messi quickly made a name for himself on his native country’s under-20 squad. He led Argentina to the title in the FIFA U-20 World Cup, scoring on a pair of penalty kicks to propel the team over Nigeria. Less than two months later, he made his pro debut with Argentina in an August friendly match against Hungary but played less than two minutes before receiving a red card and being ejected from the game.

For all his success with Barcelona, Messi repeatedly came under fire for his inability to help Argentina’s national team win a major title. In the 2014 World Cup, Argentina lost to Germany in the final, though Messi was named player of the tournament that year. In 2016, following Argentina’s second consecutive loss to Chile in the final of the Copa America tournament, Messi announced he was ending his run with the national team.

The soccer great eventually reversed his decision, but his participation in the 2018 World Cup did not bring that elusive title, as hoped. After Messi scored an early goal in a 2-1 win over Nigeria that helped his team advance from the group stage, he was largely kept in check by France, his two assists not enough to stave off a 4-3 defeat that sent Argentina packing.

The following year, after Messi heavily criticized the referees in the wake of a 2-0 loss to Brazil in the Copa America semifinals, the Argentine captain was slapped with a three-game ban by the South American Football Confederation.

At last, in 2021 and 2022, Argentina and Messi found enough traction to bring home trophies that had long evaded them. First, the team won the Copa America—Argentina’s first major title in 28 years—in August 2021, besting Brazil in the final. Captain Messi tied for top goal scorer, alongside Colombia’s Luis Diaz, and was named player of the tournament. The next year, greater glory awaited at the 2022 FIFA World Cup in Qatar.

Messi won FIFA’s World Player Trophy five times, including four consecutive wins between 2009 and 2012, and has collected its contemporary the Best FIFA Men’s Player three times, in 2019, 2022, and 2023.

The soccer legend has won Europe’s Ballon d’Or a record eight times. When he won the Ballon d’Or in October 2023, Messi became the first active MLS player to do so. He’s also won the European Golden Shoe for top scorer six times, two more than his nearest rival, Cristiano Ronaldo.

In 2023, Time magazine named Messi its Athlete of the Year, pointing to his remarkable impact on soccer’s growing popularity in the United States.

Cristiano Ronaldo News: Soccer Star Negotiating a New Contract
Portuguese soccer star Cristiano Ronaldo shared a cryptic message on social media, sparking new gossip about where the five-time Ballon d’Or winner will play next.

Ronaldo scored a goal in club team Al-Nassr’s season finale on May 26 but drew more attention with his subsequent post to X (formerly Twitter). “This chapter is over. The story? Still being written. Grateful to all,” he wrote.

The 40-year-old played for the Saudi Pro League team the past two years, scoring 99 goals in 111 total matches. However, his contract with Al-Nassr, which made him the highest-paid athlete in the world, is set to expire on June 30, meaning Ronaldo would become a free agent.

According to ESPN, Ronaldo, who has the most career goals of any men’s soccer player with 937, has reportedly received an offer to play for an unspecified Brazilian club team. This would allow him the chance to play in the Club World Cup held in the United States from June 14 through July 13. At least one commentator has suggested Ronaldo could even reunite with Lionel Messi in Major League Soccer.

In any case, fans and teams now await his decision.Who Is Cristiano Ronaldo?
Portuguese soccer superstar Cristiano Ronaldo is one of the greatest athletes in the sport’s history, winning the Ballon d’Or five times and becoming the first player to score 900 career goals. Considered a phenom as a teenager, 16-year-old Ronaldo signed with Manchester United in a record deal for a player of his age. He set a franchise record for goals scored in 2008, before transferring to Real Madrid the following year. He has since played for Italian Serie A club Juventus and is currently on the Al-Nassr FC squad in Saudi Arabia. Among his many accomplishments, Ronaldo led his home country to an emotional victory in the 2016 European Championship.Cristiano Ronaldo dos Santos Aveiro was born on February 5, 1985, in Funchal, Portugal, on the small island of Madeira off the country’s southwestern coast. He is the youngest of four children born to Maria Dolores dos Santos and José Dinis Aveiro. He was named after former U.S. President Ronald Reagan, one of his father’s favorite actors.

Ronaldo grew up in a largely working class neighborhood in a small tin-roofed home that overlooked the ocean. He was introduced to the game of soccer through his dad, who worked as an equipment manager at a boy’s club for a time.

His early life was shaped by hardship, as his father often drank too much. To help keep the children fed and maintain some financial stability, Ronaldo’s mother worked as a cook and cleaning person. The young athlete had often pushed for his father to enter rehab and address his drinking. His father, however, never accepted the offer.

By the time he was 10 years old, Ronaldo was already recognized as a phenom—a kid who ate, slept, and drank soccer. “All he wanted to do as a boy was play football,” his godfather, Fernao Sousa, recalled for British reporters, adding, “He loved the game so much he’d miss meals or escape out of his bedroom window with a ball when he was supposed to be doing his homework.”
Pro Soccer Career
Manchester United
Ronaldo had turned heads with a mesmerizing performance with Portugal against Manchester United, wowing even his opponents with his footwork and deft skill. He made such an impression that a number of United players asked their manager to try and sign the young player, which the team soon did.

In 2001, Manchester United paid more than £12 million to sign Ronaldo, then just 16 years old. The deal, worth more than $14 million U.S. dollars, was a record fee for a player of his age.

Ronaldo didn’t disappoint: He showed his promise early on in the 2004 FA Cup final, scoring the team’s first three goals and helping them capture the championship. In 2007, Ronaldo signed a five-year, £31 million contract.

A year later, Ronaldo again justified his high salary when he put together one of the club’s finest seasons in history, setting a franchise record for goals scored (42) and earning himself the FIFA World Player of the Year honor for 2008. In all, Ronaldo helped steer Manchester United to three Premier League titles.
Real Madrid
In 2009, the Spanish soccer club Real Madrid agreed to pay Manchester United a record $131 million for the chance to sign Ronaldo. Ronaldo’s commitment to Manchester United had come under constant question, and speculation swirled that he wanted to play elsewhere, so nobody was all that surprised to see Ronaldo leave.

“I know that they are going to demand a lot of me to be successful at the club, and I know that I’m going to have much more pressure than at Manchester United because I was there for many years,” Ronaldo told reporters. “But it means a new challenge and is going to help me be the best footballer.”

Ronaldo went on to compile an impressive list of individual honors and team trophies. In December 2016, he won his fourth Ballon d’Or award as the sport’s player of the year, beating out FC Barcelona’s Lionel Messi.

Ronaldo’s 2016 wins included the European Championship, Champions League, and Club World Cup, plus individual awards from UEFA and France Football magazine. The following year, he claimed a fifth Ballon d’Or to tie the mark held by his longtime rival, Messi.
Portugal National Team
On July 10, 2016, Ronaldo added an emotional victory to his collection. As his national team’s captain, Ronaldo led Portugal to the European Championship final against France.

Although he was sidelined after suffering a knee injury 25 minutes into the match, Portugal went on to win the championship title 1-0, their first international trophy. Ronaldo’s teammates said that he motivated them as team captain from the sidelines. “He gave us a lot of confidence and he said, ‘Listen people, I’m sure we will win this Euro, so stay together and fight for it,’” fullback Cedric Soares said after Portugal’s victory.

“This is one of the happiest moments in my career,” Ronaldo commented. “I’ve always said I wanted to win a trophy with the national team and make history. And I did it. Thank God, things went well for us.”

Ronaldo got off to a tremendous start at the 2018 World Cup, blasting home three goals in an opening draw versus Spain, before adding another versus Morocco to set a European record with his 85th international goal. However, he was held scoreless in a 2-1 loss to Uruguay in the knockout stage, after which he declined to comment on his future with the national team.

He returned for the 2022 World Cup but started on the bench for the team’s knockout games in the round of 16 and quarterfinals. Despite entering the latter match, Ronaldo couldn’t help the team erase a 1-0 deficit against Morocco.

Playing for Portugal on September 5, 2024, Ronaldo became the first men’s player to score 900 career goals across international and club play in a 2-1 UEFA Nations League win over Croatia.

His contributions to his country have been memorialized in a bronze bust of Ronaldo at the airport in Madeira, Portugal.
Ronaldo is in a long-term relationship with Spanish model Georgina Rodriguez. The pair were first seen together publicly around November 2016 and became an official couple the following year. Although neither has confirmed their potential marriage, Ronaldo has referred to Rodriguez as his wife in interviews as recently as July 2024.

Ronaldo and Rodriguez have four children. In June 2017, the couple welcomed twins, a boy named Mateo and a girl named Eva Maria, via a surrogate. In November 2017, Rodriguez added to their family with the birth of another girl, Alana Martina, and the couple most recently had daughter named Bella in April 2022.

Ronaldo’s eldest child, Cristiano Jr., was born to a former girlfriend in June 2010.
Sexual Assault Investigation
In 2018, police in Las Vegas reopened a 9-year old investigation into claims that Ronaldo had raped a woman in his hotel room. The accuser also filed a civil lawsuit against the star athlete.
The following summer, the district attorney for Clark County, Nevada, announced that he had reviewed the case and wouldn’t pursue criminal charges against Ronaldo.

The Top 5 Longreads of the Week
How rural America is failing migrants. The life lessons of soccer strategy. Moving on after the unthinkable happens. One house’s unsettling past. And a conversation between film icons. (Who doesn’t need more Nic Cage?) Welcome to our editors’ five favorite stories of the week.

1. What Happened to Rezwan
Kartikay Mehrotra, Matti Gellman | ProPublica, The Kansas City Star | November 19, 2022 | 5,098 words

At the Statue of Liberty, the final line of Emma Lazarus’ poem “The New Colossus” reads: “Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!” There’s no question that the Biden administration had the best intentions in evacuating Afghan allies out of the country in August 2021 when the United States turned its back on the country, 20 years into a failed war. But some of the tempest-tost of Afghanistan have found small (if any) welcome in rural America, where there is little experience in helping newcomers and immigrants to become happy, productive members of the community. In this nuanced piece jointly published by ProPublica and The Kansas City Star, reporters Kartikay Mehrotra and Matti Gellman try to unravel the bureaucratic inadequacies that failed the Kohistani family — and may have caused 14-year-old Rezwan Kohistani to take his own life. —KS

2. Life, Death, and Total Football
Rosecrans Baldwin | GQ | November 29, 2022 | 3,306 words

Like so many others in my generation, I grew up playing soccer. And like so many others in my generation who grew up playing soccer, the magic of Dutch footballer Johan Cruyff was drilled into both my head and feet: his on-ball moves, his off-ball philosophy. Team Netherlands’ totaalvoetbal (Total Football) strategy may not have reigned on the international stage past the ’70s, but its emphasis on flowing in and out of space would inform player development even in the States into the ’90s. It also came to govern the larger philosophy of Rosecrans Baldwin’s friend Lars, a man who loved soccer and coaching as fiercely as he loved his family — until he succumbed to cancer three years ago. Now, on the eve of the Dutch and U.S. men’s teams meeting in the World Cup, Baldwin unpacks Lars’ impact on his own life, and how he sought to chronicle and preserve Lars’ outlook while there was still time. This is a piece about Baldwin’s loss, of course, but it’s really a piece about how soccer changed Lars, and how Lars changed the world around him. “A friend comes into your life and shows you it’s flexible,” Baldwin writes. “A friend alters your life by appearing in a new role. The role changes, the friendship changes.” Sharing space isn’t just for the game pitch. —PR

3. Identity Crisis
Deepa Padmanaban | Fifty Two | November 25, 2022 | 4,006 words

In these times that feel constantly pierced by mass death events, we’ve seen more stories detailing the invisible and often forgotten work of emergency responders who are first to encounter the dead. In a resource-strapped country like India, it’s hard to imagine the logistics of rescue operations, and even more so what is needed to properly and humanely manage a massive number of bodies after a large-scale natural disaster. But Deepa Padmanaban lays this all out with care in this Fifty Two story. “Prioritising the living over the dead is a given,” Padmanaban writes, but she also says that more respectful handling and more swift identification of victims allows their families to move on. The 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami revealed the lack of forensic infrastructure in the country, and Padmanaban reports on how practices like forensic odontology, which uses dental expertise, can be a reliable way to identify victims. (Padmanaban shares that Argentinian grandmothers in the late 1970s were the first people to suggest forensics as a way to identity victims — in their case, their daughters who had been abducted by Argentina’s military junta, and their daughters’ children.) This is an interesting piece on humanitarian forensics in India and, above all, honoring the dead and offering compassionate care to those left behind. —CLR

4. ‘The More We Pulled Back The Carpet, The More We Saw’: What I Learned When I Bought a House With a Dark Past
Matt Blake | The Guardian | November 19, 2022 | 3,311 words

Lying at the intersection of real estate, horror, and murder mystery is this gripping essay by Matt Blake. Have you ever considered your house’s past? Unless you are sitting in a brand new building, other people have called your house home before you. Blake knew this, but as he states, “treated this house’s past like the junk folder in my email: you know there might be bad stuff in there, but so long as you never open it, it can’t do any harm.” Then he opened it. Uncovering a gruesome story, Blake asks fascinating questions about where we live. Does a house soak in vibes? I was amazed to learn tears and sweat glands pump out “chemosignals” other people detect, not only in the moment but after the source has gone. Miss Habersham’s house must have oozed sadness for years. Blake traces his house’s history back to the very beginning. You can imagine the lives of the people that stood on those floors before him: “When Queen Victoria died, it was inhabited by a cordwainer – a shoemaker – and his family. When the first world war broke out, a wonderfully described ‘cutter of fancy materials’ was here with his wife and three children.” Knowing what Blake learns about a later inhabitant, I may not have stayed in that house, but Blake and his daughter do. The next family to make it their home. —CW

In my house, we worship at several artistic altars, two of which are Nicolas Cage and horror movies. My husband is a devotee of the former, I of the latter. So I can’t help but feel that this conversation between Cage and horror auteur John Carpenter was made specially for us. Situated here as two of the weirdest, most talented figures in modern Hollywood — no arguments from me — the pair talk about James Dean’s “perfect” career, how to know if your child is an actor, some very discomfiting alpacas, and doing charades with Anthony Perkins. Their dialogue is a delight. Time to rewatch Halloween and Mandy. —SD

The Country Where Fútbol Comes First
They call it the Maracanazo — the final match of the 1950 FIFA World Cup, held in Rio de Janeiro. Host team Brazil was the obvious favorite, set to take on their much-smaller neighbor to the south, Uruguay. Victory was nothing short of inevitable.
The match took place on July 16, in the newly opened Estádio do Maracanã. The official paid attendance was 173,850 — of whom approximately 100 were Uruguayans — but because the stadium’s grandstands had no seats, the actual number might be closer to 210,000. It’s still one of the most-attended sports events of all time.

On the morning of the match, in true Brazilian style, an impromptu carnival began at dawn, with the crowds chanting “Brazil must win!” A samba, “Brazil The Victors,” had been composed, and the mayor of Rio addressed the Brazilian team with a rousing speech: “You, players, who in less than a few hours will be hailed as champions by millions of compatriots! You, who have no rivals in the entire hemisphere! You, who will overcome any other competitor! You, who I already salute as victors!”

That day’s morning edition of O Mundo ran a photo of the Brazilian team on its front page, beneath which a caption read five fateful words:
"These are the world champions"
There was only one problem — they hadn’t played the game yet, and Brazil’s small but mighty opponents weren’t ready to go down without a fight.


When Uruguay’s team captain, Obdulio Varela, saw the newspaper headlines that morning, he bought 20 copies. He laid them out across the floor of his hotel bathroom, where he and the rest of his team proceeded to trample and urinate on them.

Varela played an even bigger role in the locker room minutes before the game began. While coach Juan López wanted his team to keep to their signature defensive strategy, Varela waited for López to leave the room before addressing the team himself. He told them they would surely lose if they played it safe. As the underdogs, they had no choice but to attack and fight back against the odds.
He encouraged them not to mind the crowds; on the field, they’d just be 11 players against 11 players. “Let’s start the show,” he ended.
And start the show they did. While Brazil scored first, Uruguay responded with a goal of their own midway into the second half. Then, with 11 minutes remaining in the match, Uruguay brought the score to 2-1.

As the clock inched closer and closer to the full 90 minutes, the stadium grew more and more silent. The air hung heavy with shock and disbelief.

So upsetting was Uruguay’s victory over Brazil that day that the match became known as the Maracanazo — the Maracanã Blow — and it’s a story that every Uruguayan since then knows from birth, one that’s taken on the stuff of legend.
Before I moved to Uruguay nearly two years ago, if you’d asked me if I liked soccer, I would’ve told you I loved it — even if I am from the U.S., where “football” refers to something else entirely.

Although I’ve never played a game of soccer in my life, I would’ve proudly told you about my younger brother Grant, who joined his first team when he was 5 and never stopped — playing all the way through high school and college into a couple of Professional Development League teams in California and Tennessee.

But then I met my Uruguayan boyfriend José while we were both traveling through Europe. Just a few months later, we moved to Uruguay together — a country of just 3.5 million people, and a place where there would be no mistaking what sport fútbol refers to.
On one of my first nights in the country, Uruguay’s national team played Venezuela in a World Cup qualifying match, and José’s parents bought tickets for us all to go. Funneling into Montevideo’s Centenario Stadium that night, there was a palpable excitement in the air. Makeshift stalls were set up on every street corner surrounding the stadium, selling Uruguayan flags in every imaginable size.
I remember two distinct moments from that match. The first was taking in the crowd and realizing all the Uruguayan men around us had assumed the same posture for the game. Nearly every one of them had a ubiquitous yerba mate gourd in one hand, as well as a thermos of hot water tucked into the crook of that same elbow, and they drank the mate at a steady pace throughout the game.

But this arrangement still kept their other arm free, which they used to punch the air in frustration, anger, or, on rare occasions — such as the three goals Uruguay scored that night — exultation.
The other moment I remember is when José dared me to yell out “Son of a bitch!” in English the next time the referee made a bad call.

“No way,” I said, looking at his mom and dad sitting next to us. “I can’t do that in front of your parents — I’m still trying to make a good impression.”

I’ll never forget José’s father Marcelo leaning over and saying to me, smiling yet dead serious:
“Exactly,” José said. “Like when we were at school, if we were caught swearing in class, our teacher would always say, ‘Did you forget you’re not at the stadium?’”

That night, I began to wonder if perhaps there are different levels of love for something — and that just as the Norwegians have a specific word, forelsket, for the euphoria one feels at the beginning of love, there needs to be a better word for the passion that Uruguayans have for fútbol.

* * *

Uruguay is, for the most part, an extremely relaxed place to live. Many Uruguayans enjoy nothing more than setting up a pair of beach chairs by the water, passing around their mate, and letting time drift by as the sun sets over the Río de la Plata. Whenever someone asks me if I like Uruguay, I always tell them that what I love most about it is the chilled-out rhythm of life here; life just feels more tranquilo, as they say.

All this tranquility suddenly evaporates when soccer is involved. I simply accepted this about the culture for most of the time I’ve been here; it was only recently, as the World Cup was about to begin in June and Uruguay got ready to cheer on its team in Russia, that I felt compelled to get to the bottom of why soccer is so damn dominant in this country.

“It’s just deeply rooted in the culture here,” José told me when I asked him about it. He told me about the Maracanazo in Brazil, of course (to which my first response was, “How is there not a movie about that?”) as well as an even earlier event that also helped cement the eminence of soccer in Uruguay: the inaugural World Cup in 1930.
FIFA chose Uruguay to host the event after they won the gold medal in men’s soccer at both the 1924 and 1928 Summer Olympics. Uruguay went on to defeat Argentina in the final match and was crowned the first-ever World Cup champions. Most of the tournament’s matches were played in Centenario Stadium — the one I went to myself during my first week in Montevideo. FIFA has even declared the stadium a Historical Monument of World Football — the only one of its kind.

“You’re born knowing these stories and growing up with these legends,” José shared with me. “There are only eight countries that have ever won the World Cup title. You have countries like Germany, Italy, Argentina, and Brazil… and then you’ve got Uruguay. And for such a small country, that’s a huge deal.”
Weeks before the World Cup kicked off, Uruguayan flags began showing up all over Montevideo — huge flags strung from apartment balconies, and small flags on plastic poles clipped to car windows. Seemingly overnight, nearly every local establishment had been festooned with balloons and streamers, bunting and flags. I started a running list of all the places I saw decorated: the supermarket and pharmacy, schools and hair salons, restaurants, a pet supply store, even the FedEx office.
It was a display of national pride that I’ve rarely witnessed in other countries around the world — perhaps only in England, where I was living when Prince William and Kate Middleton were married, and all of London had turned red, white, and blue.
In the initial group stage, Uruguay was going to face off against host team Russia, as well as Egypt and Saudi Arabia. Their first game against Egypt was scheduled to begin on a Friday at 9 a.m. When I asked José how he was going to manage watching the game at work, he said, “Oh no, my boss gave us the morning off.”

He said this naturally, as if he had expected this to happen. I tried to imagine a situation in the U.S. when the same thing would happen — and failed.

After Uruguay won that game, the stakes were even higher for the second match against Saudi Arabia: If Uruguay won, they would automatically qualify for the knockout round and make it into the top 16 teams.

This time, the game was scheduled for 11 a.m. — slightly too late for José to watch it from home, but he and his boss came up with the next best thing: They borrowed a projector, set up a huge white screen against the wall, and transformed their office into the perfect viewing space, complete with an impressive selection of charcuterie. When I got there to watch the game with them, José told me his boss had even canceled their meetings for that morning, officially establishing the hierarchy of their priorities. If it wasn’t clear before, now I knew: Soccer came first.
With their first two wins in the bag, Uruguay qualified for the knockout round, and their third match — against Russia — felt more like a formality. José didn’t think it would be nearly as big of a deal, so I told him I’d just meet him at his office before the game.

I took my time getting ready and missed my bus. I realized I wouldn’t arrive at José’s office until well into the first half. Never before had I been on the streets in the last few minutes leading up to a game, and never had I seen the streets look so empty. The entire city had ground to a halt. I was the last person waiting at the bus stop; everyone else around me was running, either alone or in hurried groups. For all I knew, the Zombie Apocalypse was about to strike Montevideo.

I boarded the next bus at the exact moment the match started, the radio naturally turned to the game. I leaned my head against the window and settled into my seat for the journey, while the bus followed the city’s winding coastline. Suddenly, less than ten minutes into the game, the Uruguayan announcer’s voice began to scream:
"GOOL"
"GOOOOL"
Three times he announced the goal, piercing my heart with every prolonged cry. My head rested against the window no more. I moved to the front seat of the bus, right across from the driver, and leaned forward with an intensity I rarely feel, as though I myself could impel the bus to go faster.

Then, while we were waiting at a red light just one block away from José’s office, the announcer erupted for a second time:
I stopped and imagined how I might appear to others in that moment, and what I pictured was this: A raving fanatic with her hands thrown up in frustration, identical to all those I’d once witnessed at Centenario Stadium. At last, I knew my transformation was complete — I no longer just loved soccer as an observer, cheering on my brother from the sidelines.

For the first time, I felt like an active participant, caught up in a fervor so much bigger than myself.
I imagined that was the extent of our celebrating, until José and I were driving home and traffic came to a standstill. For a while, we inched forward at a snail’s pace, horns blaring all around us, until I could start to make out an enormous crowd in the distance.

“Go, go, go,” José said, sensing my anxiety.

I hesitated for all of two seconds, before grabbing my camera and sprinting off into the crowd. As far as I could see in either direction, the boardwalk along Pocitos Beach was packed with people, and they were all wearing flags or waving them high in the air. José eventually met me there, and we were soon swept up into one euphoric sea of blue and white. While every passing car leaned on its horn, the crowd sang its way through a series of chants. I’d heard them all before, but one suddenly took on a whole new meaning:
Nearly 70 years after that pivotal day in Rio de Janeiro, would this year’s World Cup finally hold another Maracanazo upset for Uruguay?

Would they surprise the world yet again and be crowned champions for a third time?

As it would turn out, not this year. Six days after their win over Portugal, Uruguay went on to lose to France in the quarterfinals. But in that singular moment on the boardwalk, as the crowds sang and danced around us and another generation of Uruguayans dreamed of victory, I realized I didn’t even care what the rest of the tournament held — because with a legacy as layered and legendary as Uruguay’s, there was already plenty to celebrate.

And that, Uruguay has taught me, is the true magic of fútbol. It’s a sport where teams thrive against the odds; a sport where anything is possible; and at any moment, a tiny country can make history.

Tomorrow Belongs to God
On November 28, 2016, LaMia Flight 2933 left Bolivia for Colombia. It was carrying the Chapecoense football club to the Copa Sudamericana final — the first appearance in the club’s 44 year history. The plane crashed as it approached the airport. Only six of the 77 passengers survived, including three players. This is their story.

Neto
I dreamed that it would happen. A few days before we were supposed to leave for the Copa Sudamericana finals in Colombia, I had a terrible nightmare. When I woke up, I told my wife that I had been in a plane crash. I was in the airplane at night, and there was a lot of rain. Then the plane shut off. It fell from the sky. But somehow I could stand up from the wreckage. I walked out and was on a mountain at night. Everything was dark. That’s all I remembered.

On the day of the trip to the finals, I couldn’t get the nightmare out of my mind. The dream was so vivid. It was hammering in my mind. So I sent a message to my wife from the airplane. I told her to pray to God to protect me from that dream. I didn’t want to believe that it was really going to happen. But I asked her to pray for me.

And then I saw all the things from the dream really happening.…

The plane shut off.

The power went down completely.

I was wide awake.

… Then the plane fell from the sky.

It was beyond our comprehension as humans.

Jakson Follmann
On the plane that day, everyone was hanging out, playing cards, playing music.

Alan Ruschel

I was doing some card tricks. I always liked to do that. We were all laughing and playing pagode (Brazilian samba music). It was a group of people that were extremely happy to be making history, regardless of whether or not we became the champions. We were taking a club from a small town in Brazil to the final of the Copa Sudamericana. So we were really happy

Jakson

It was an easy flight. Until all the lights in the plane shut off. There was just silence. Suddenly, everyone sat down. People wanted to know what was happening, but the flight attendants weren’t saying anything. Then a few minutes before we fell, the flight attendant passed by and said, “Put on your seatbelts, because we’re gonna land now.


It was very calm. Nobody announced anything on the microphone. And then we started to fall.

Not many people on earth have gone through that moment before. One second you are on your way to conquer your dreams with all your friends and everyone is happy, and then the next second all the power shuts off on the plane, and you are falling from the sky.

I only had time to pray and ask God to protect me. Inside the plane, you can’t do anything. You can’t run, you can’t cry, you can’t ask for help, you can’t ask why. All you can do is pray and leave your life in God’s hands.

Alan

From time to time, I try to remember the moment, but I can’t. I guess your brain kind of blocks the memories.

Neto

I remember my last words in the plane. I was praying, praying, praying out loud. When I saw the airplane was definitely going to fall for real … I said, “Jesus, Jesus, I read in the Bible that you made so many miracles. Please, please be merciful of us. Look after us. Help us. Help the pilot. Help us in this plane. Be merciful. Please, Jesus, help us.”

Even praying to a God who is so powerful, looking at the situation with human eyes, I knew it was impossible. My last and only resource was prayer.

Jakson
A lot of people started praying out loud. Minutes before we fell, people in the front of the plane started asking what was going on. They were yelling, “Somebody say something! Give us some information!”
I remember people saying those things, and after that, I remember nothing.
Neto
And then everything goes black.
Jakson

I woke up in the woods. I opened my eyes, but everything was super dark. It was raining. And it was really, really cold. I couldn’t see — I could only hear things. A lot of people were groaning, calling out for help. I started calling for help, too. But I had no idea where I was. I had no idea that I had fallen from an airplane. I just remember pleading that I didn’t want to die.

The hardest part was hearing all my friends calling for help, and I couldn’t do anything about it. I couldn’t get up. It was so dark and I couldn’t see anyone. Now, I thank God that I couldn’t see anything.

I would wake up and then shut down. Wake up and then shut down. I don’t know how much time I was awake.

Then, at some point, I could see a flashlight in the woods.

There were people yelling, “Policía Nacional, Policía Nacional!”

When the police got there, some of the people next to me who had been yelling for help before … they weren’t yelling anymore. Or their voices were very weak. It was a very, very sad moment.

When the rescue people got to me … a man named Sergeant Nelson got to me. I lifted up my arm and he held my hand.

He said, “Stay calm. You’re saved.”

Then he asked my age and my name.

I said I was the goalkeeper.

Later on, the sergeant told me that it was the most horrible scene he had ever witnessed in his life. He tried to lift me up from my back, but he couldn’t because I was feeling a lot of pain. Terrible pain. Because in the accident, I had already lost my right foot. And my left foot was just hanging by the tendons.

They picked me up and had to carry me up a muddy hill. It was very difficult ground, and it was really dangerous because pieces of the plane were everywhere, and they were extremely sharp. Those rescuers, they are heroes.
“God was with me the whole time.”

But I didn’t remember anything. The doctors couldn’t tell me about the accident yet. They wanted me to recover first.

I tried to recognize the place that I was in. I knew I was in a hospital, but I didn’t recognize it. The workers in the hospital, I would look at them, and I didn’t know them. They were speaking Spanish. I was very confused

When I saw the Chapecoense doctor, that’s when I remembered that we were supposed to be playing in the finals.

I said, “Doc, what happened at the game? Did I get hurt?”

He said, “Yeah, Neto, you got hurt in the game.”

I said, “What was the score?”

He said, “I don’t know. You got hurt really bad, and I came straight here to see you.”

I believed him. I thought the game was still going on, and I was upset with God. I was thinking, How can you take the final away from me? I need to be there with my brothers.

I had been in a coma for four days, and my head was very confused. As far as the accident, my brain kind of blocked it out. I didn’t turn the TV on. My family didn’t say anything, and I didn’t want to know. I had an idea of what had happened, but I thought that way more people must have survived. Like it was a small accident or something. Maybe an emergency landing, and everyone was O.K.

I just remember the psychologist from the hospital came into the room at some point and said, “Your plane crashed and it exploded. Everyone died. You survived, but you won’t be able to play football again.”

When he said that, all these flashes started to come back to me. I thought of all my friends, and it was very, very sad.

Then my family told me that I had lost my right leg, and that I would never be able to play football again.

When they said that, my first reaction was, Better my leg than my life. Thank God I am still here.

Later on, I found out that Alan and Neto had made it, and that gave me extra motivation to keep fighting.

Kevin de Bruyne has completed his move to Napoli after the Belgian midfielder left Manchester City at the end of the Premier League season.

De Bruyne will link up with former Chelsea and Tottenham manager Antonio Conte, who is head coach of the Italian champions.

In moving to Italy on a free transfer, De Bruyne rejected an offer from Major League Soccer club Chicago Fire, and the switch means he can play in the Champions League next season.

Napoli announced the signing of the 33-year-old with a computer-generated image, external of De Bruyne sitting on a throne wearing a crown, captioned "King Kev is here".

He left Manchester City after 10 years at the club, winning 19 major trophies after joining from Wolfsburg in 2015.
De Bruyne notably helped City to win six Premier League titles, five League Cups and two FA Cups - plus their first Champions League title in 2023, completing the Treble as Pep Guardiola's team became only the second English side ever to achieve the feat.

His departure from City was announced before the end of the season, and De Bruyne bid an emotional farewell at Etihad Stadium following his final home league match against Bournemouth in May.

He also briefly appeared at Fulham in City's final game of the domestic season.

"It's been unbelievable to have the 10 years that I had with everything that happened here. It's been an unbelievable ride and an absolute pleasure," De Bruyne said of his City exit.

"It was a joy working really hard to try and help create something that brought the club the success we enjoyed. I'm super proud to have played a part in that.

"Manchester has been my home and my family's home for these past 10 years."

City have moved quickly to fill the creative gap left by De Bruyne, signing midfielders Tijjani Reijnders from AC Milan and Rayan Cherki from Lyon.

They could face De Bruyne in the Champions League next season, with the Belgium international continuing his career at the top level.

He joins up with former Premier League midfielders Scott McTominay and Billy Gilmour in a Napoli side who narrowly prevailed in a thrilling Serie A title race last season.

England right-back Trent Alexander-Arnold described joining Real Madrid as a "dream come true" and "huge responsibility" as he addressed the audience in Spanish at his presentation on Thursday.

Alexander-Arnold, 26, would have been able to leave Liverpool on a free transfer at the end of his contract on 30 June but the 15-time European champions Real paid the Reds a fee to release him early so that he could play for them at this month's Club World Cup.

A highlights video showing Alexander-Arnold as a young player plus his goals, assists and defending for Liverpool and England was played prior to Real president Florentino Perez welcoming the right-back to the club.

Alexander-Arnold, who was sat with his girlfriend, Estelle Behnke, his parents and brothers, then took to the stage and addressed the audience - which included former Real left-back Roberto Carlos - in Spanish.

"Thank you so much to President Florentino Perez and Real Madrid for this opportunity," he said.

"Signing for a club like Real Madrid doesn't happen every day. It's a dream come true. I'm very happy and proud to be here. I'm eager to show the club and the fans what I can do."

Alexander-Arnold said he is "ready to give everything for the team and for the Real Madrid fans", adding: "I want to show them what I can do, I want to win many titles, be champions, and continue to grow and enjoy football with the best in the world."

The two-time Premier League champion was then pictured with Perez holding the Real shirt, with the name Trent instead of Alexander-Arnold on it, and the number 12 rather than the 66 he wore at Liverpool.

"A player who has won everything, one of the best defenders and full-backs in world football," said Perez.

"One on the greatest players worldwide is joining this club and hopefully we can write a new page in the history books."

In his news conference shortly afterwards in which he spoke English, Alexander-Arnold said he had been learning Spanish for "few months".

He added: "I think he [Perez] was happy with the amount of Spanish I was able to speak, which I think surprised a lot of people.

"For me, it was important to be able to do that and it shows that the intent I have got is to come here and have a good start, to get off on the right foot and to achieve something straight away, starting with the Club World Cup."
Real's opening Club World Cup group game is against Saudi side Al-Hilal on 18 June in Miami.

The England international has agreed a six-year deal with the La Liga side and his contract includes a 1bn euro (£840m) buy-out clause.

Alexander-Arnold made 354 appearances for Liverpool - who he was with from the age of six - scoring 23 goals and providing 86 assists for the club since making his debut in 2016.

His departure follows him helped the Reds win the 2024-25 Premier League title under Arne Slot and he also won the top-flight under former Liverpool manager Jurgen Klopp in 2019-20.

His other trophies with Liverpool include the Champions League in 2018-19, the 2022 FA Cup and two League Cups.

Alexander-Arnold was booed by sections of the Liverpool crowd in his first game after announcing he would be leaving the club.

He came on as a substitute against Arsenal and Klopp later said he "turned off TV' after hearing the jeering of his former player.

Alexander-Arnold was given a warmer reaction when he played against Crystal Palace in the final game of the campaign.

"I always knew, if I was to ever leave Liverpool, it would only be to go to Real Madrid, that would be the only club for me," said the defender.

"I'm not going to say it was easy because I'd been there so long, been a part of it, but eventually, you have to make a decision.

"In my mind, I've made the right one and it's one that I'm very excited about."

Alexander-Arnold joins fellow England international Jude Bellingham at Real Madrid.

"We spoke," said Alexander-Arnold of Bellingham. "It wasn't exactly what people might think it was. We spoke a lot about Liverpool, we spoke a lot about Madrid - the kind of conversation you have as players and as friends.

"In the national team, he is the only player that knew what it was like to be at Real Madrid, so everyone was asking questions.

"A lot of people think he played a huge part in me coming here, but to be honest the club speaks for itself.

"It was a huge opportunity for me, it felt like it was the right time for me as well - a chance for me to go and do that."

Alonso 'was a big idol of mine'
Former Liverpool midfielder Xabi Alonso has replaced Carlo Ancelotti as Real manager and Alexander-Arnold spoke about how watched his new manager help the Reds win the Champions League in 2005.

Alonso scored when Liverpool dramatically came back from 3-0 down to draw 3-3 with AC Milan before winning on penalties.

"I grew up as a Liverpool fan, seeing [what happened] in Istanbul with the manager now doing amazing things and playing his part in an incredible final," said Alexander-Arnold.

"We have spoken a little bit. It is good to have that communication. I told him that he was a big idol of mine growing up so to be able to work with him now is a dream come true for me."

A stylish midfielder, Alonso played 210 times for Liverpool from 2004 to 2009 and was renowned for his passing range.

Alexander-Arnold added: "He is someone who probably impacted my game a lot growing up, seeing him pass a ball. I explained this to him as well.

"Watching him pass a ball - seeing it influenced me to go and train harder at that and have a great hunger to be able to do that and to set standards.

"Of course, we have not had chance to formally meet yet. We will have a proper chat I am sure over the next few days and be able to talk about what he expects from me."

I am not bitter - Mbappe on PSG Champions League win
Kylian Mbappe says he is not bitter over Paris St-Germain's Champions League victory less than a year after leaving the club for Real Madrid.

The forward left PSG as the club's record goalscorer but was unable to win European football's premier club competition in seven seasons with the French giants before signing for Madrid on a free transfer in July 2024.

PSG cruised past Inter Milan 5-0 to win their first Champions League title on 31 May.

"I didn't leave too soon; my story with PSG was over. I am not bitter; I had reached the end of the road," said France captain Mbappe, who scored 256 goals for PSG.

Speaking on Saturday at a news conference before France's Nations League third-place match with Germany, Mbappe added: "I tried everything, and it was destiny that meant it had to happen without me.

"PSG winning the Champions League without me doesn't affect me. I was happy - I think they deserved it.

"They've had so many years where they struggled. I've been there too; I've played in every Champions League stage in Paris except for the victory.

"They're the best team in Europe. I don't remember seeing a team win 5-0 in a major final."

The closest Mbappe came to Champions League success with his boyhood club was a runners-up medal following defeat by Bayern Munich in the 2020 final.

Mbappe's Madrid, who were knocked out by Arsenal at the quarter-final stage of last season's Champions League, ended the campaign without a trophy for the first time in four years.

The 26-year-old did enjoy some success, though, after scoring 31 La Liga goals to win the European Golden Shoe.

A new winner, but is Champions League now a Super League by default?
Paris St-Germain are the champions of Europe - first-time winners after thrashing Inter Milan 5-0 in the most one-sided final of the competition's history.

They are the first French side to win the coveted prize since Marseille in 1993 and only the 24th different club to lift the famous trophy.

On paper the Champions League and its new format appears a more diverse competition - before you remember PSG's starting XI in Munich cost £403m to assemble, compared to the £137m Inter paid for their starting side.

"Everyone criticised us and doubted us, lots of people didn't believe in our project," PSG president Nasser Al-Khelaifi told Canal Plus.

"The objective now is to win again. It has taken 14 years of hard work but we are building something for the future."

Qatar Sports Investments bought PSG in 2011. Since then the club has spent 2.3bn euros (£2.1bn) on transfer fees,, external according to estimates from Transfermarkt.

"If you take a look at their wage bill from last season, it was probably one of the top two or three highest in European football," football finance expert Kieran Maguire told BBC Sport.

"It's romantic in the sense they won the Champions League for the first time and the football was absolutely brilliant. But from a financial point of view, you would expect them to be there or thereabouts."

The last club to win the Champions League for the first time were Manchester City, who are under Abu Dhabi ownership and, according to Deloitte's Money League, are the second richest club in the world behind only Real Madrid and one place above PSG.

The new Champions League format involves more teams - 36 in the competition proper instead of 32 under the old format - while the new league phase offers fans more games, more goals and a chance to see European heavyweights play one another more frequently.

It was introduced following the collapse of a new European Super League (ESL),, external as most of the teams involved withdrew after a backlash led by fans.

But is the new-look Champions League a European Super League in all but name?
What was the European Super League and why was it controversial?
Twelve of Europe's leading clubs - including six from the Premier League - signed up to plans to form a European Super League in 2021.

Arsenal, Chelsea, Liverpool, Manchester United, Manchester City and Tottenham were the English representatives, joining AC Milan, Inter Milan, Juventus, Real Madrid, Atletico Madrid and Barcelona as founding members.

The league would have essentially replaced the Champions League as Europe's elite competition, but would not have had the same qualification process whereby teams could enter via their domestic position.

At the same time, the founding members wanted to remain part of their respective domestic leagues.

The plans proved controversial, not just with supporters but with rival clubs who said it devalued domestic competition.

Given founding members of the competition could not be 'relegated' from it, critics argued the tournament was a closed book for Europe's elite teams.

PSG and Bayern Munich rejected approaches to join, while fans from the clubs involved held several protests, leading to all six English clubs withdrawing from the process.
Not right England have six Champions League spots'
Next season's Champions League will include six English Premier League teams instead of the usual four.

Newcastle United, who finished fifth in the table, will play in the competition after European football's governing body Uefa awarded two bonus spots to the domestic leagues which performed best in Europe in 2024-25.

Meanwhile, Tottenham - who finished 17th - will also join Liverpool, Arsenal, Manchester City and Chelsea in the competition after winning the Europa League.

Twenty-two of the 36 places in the league phase will come from Europe's top-five leagues, with Spain securing five spots, Germany and Italy four each, while France will have three teams.

In addition, the Netherlands will have two teams in the league phase, while Portugal, Greece, Czech Republic, Turkey and Belgium will have one team each.

Just 11 of those 29 clubs have qualified for the league phase as champions of their country this season.

That leaves only seven places to be decided through the qualifying rounds.

"I don't think it's right that England should have six teams in the Champions League," said Ian Dennis, senior football reporter at BBC Radio 5 Live., external

"I know why. We're gearing ourselves towards...it's effectively a Super League in all but name.

"But if you think about it, the dominance of the Premier League teams in the various European competitions, the English coefficient unless it's unusual, will always be in the top three, if not the top two.

"And therefore the English clubs are always going to benefit with the extra place.

"Now England have got six clubs in the Champions League, Spain have got five…I think it's going to be very hard to try to wrestle that away from the English sides."
Will an underdog win the Champions League again?
Who were the last true underdogs to win the Champions League - and will it happen again?

Jose Mourinho's Porto enjoyed a fairytale run to the final, external in 2003-04, which included beating a dominant Manchester United along the way, before defeating Monaco 3-0 in the final.

In 21 editions since, there have been 10 different winners - Real Madrid (six times), Barcelona (4), Liverpool (2), Chelsea (2), Bayern Munich (2), AC Milan (1), Manchester United (1), Inter Milan (1), Manchester City (1) and Paris St-Germain (1).

"The probability of another Porto winning the Champions League is about the same as another Leicester City winning the Premier League," Maguire added.

"We've had a concentration of wealth in the hands of fewer and fewer clubs. We have got the rise of dynasties now.

"The Champions League is very much geared and tiered towards wealthy clubs - and that's due to having to give away concessions to the Super League clubs in order to dissuade them from reconsidering setting up their own competition."
Arsenal the next first-time winners?
After Manchester City's success in 2023 and PSG's triumph in Munich, who will be the next first-time winners?

"Arsenal are well placed because they do have serious investment as far as the squad is concerned - probably in the region of £700m to £800m," added Maguire.

Inter Milan were the last Italian club to win the Champions League in 2010 when Mourinho was in charge.

Maguire added: "Could we see another Italian club perhaps do it? Possibly, but I honestly believe it's unlikely. In France, it's PSG or nobody given the collapse of the French TV deal., external

"In Spain, if Atletico Madrid can get their ducks in order.

"That's probably as far as we can go."
'Who needs Mbappe when you have Doue?' - PSG's new superstar
When Desire Doue walked off slowly and disconsolately after only 64 minutes at Arsenal in October, the teenager touted as French football's next golden boy looked alone and out of his depth.

Fast forward eight months - after a scintillating performance in a Champions League final demolition of Inter Milan - and Paris St-Germain's brilliant young forward has captured the imagination of Europe.

For someone whose name translates to 'desire gifted' in English, the 19-year-old has lived up to that billing since putting the false start behind him in spectacular fashion.

Doue's day of disappointment came in a 2-0 loss at Emirates Stadium in the tournament's new league table format.

Since then, he has matured into a central piece in the new PSG assembled by coach Luis Enrique, performing superbly when Manchester City were beaten 4-2 at Parc des Princes in January, then delivering a brilliant cameo as a substitute before scoring the decisive penalty in the shootout win at Anfield in the last 16.

A mesmerising display followed when he scored a stunning curling equaliser while running Aston Villa ragged in PSG's captivating 3-1 win in the quarter-final first leg.

But the performance that really put Doue's name on everyone's lips came in European club football's grandest game, as he scored twice after assisting the opening goal in a 5-0 thrashing of Inter in Munich.

"All evening, he had that magic moment. What a player he looks," said former Premier League winner Chris Sutton on BBC Radio 5 Live.

"Who needs Kylian Mbappe when you've got Desire Doue?"

At 19 years and 362 days, Doue became the youngest player to score two goals in a European Cup or Champions League final, overtaking Eusebio who was 20 years and 97 days old when he did the same for Benfica against Real Madrid in 1962.

He had 41 touches of the ball in the final in Munich, two of them ended in him scoring, another an assist, and several with sublime bits of skill that brought roars from PSG's fanatical crowd.

"I have no words, incredible for me. I have no words," beamed the teenager after PSG's victory.

It has been a meteoric rise for Angers-born Doue, who was not even a guaranteed starter at Rennes last season before making a £43m move to PSG in the summer as they tried to fill an Mbappe-sized hole in their attack.
Doue comes from strong footballing stock, with his 22-year-old brother Guela playing right-back for Strasbourg after leaving Rennes, while cousin Yann Gboho is a talented attacking midfield player at Toulouse.

He is of French-Ivorian descent, making his full France debut in the 2-0 win against Croatia in the Uefa Nations League quarter-final in March, again scoring a penalty as they went through after a shootout.

Brother Guela has other international allegiances, winning caps for Ivory Coast.

The brothers developed under the watchful guidance of father Maho, who worked with them every day - organising training sessions outside the work they were doing at Rennes, and still exerts a wise and steadying influence on their careers.

Some eyebrows were raised when PSG paid such a large fee for Doue in the summer, but Rennes are as good at driving a hard bargain as they are producing young gems.

They have history, selling Doue's current team-mate Ousmane Dembele to Borussia Dortmund, Eduardo Camavinga to Real Madrid and Mathys Tel, who has been on loan at Tottenham Hotspur, to Bayern Munich.

Arsenal, Chelsea, Spurs, Manchester United and Newcastle all showed serious interest in Doue - but it came down to PSG or Bayern.

French football expert Julien Laurens told BBC Sport: "PSG probably would have liked to pay about £34m and tried to get it down, while Bayern were happy to pay more than £50m - but he wanted to go to PSG.

"It might have felt a little high, as it was when PSG paid £34m for Bradley Barcola after six good months as Lyon, but there is a premium, as there is in England, when you sell from French club to French club.

"The key was that Luis Enrique and sporting director Luis Campos were both convinced they were getting a superstar in the making.

"Doue is so talented, strong mentally and physically. At PSG, they say he's got rugby players' legs because the bottom half of his body is so strong.

"They knew in Paris it would take time but they were ready. Luis Enrique was so happy to sign him. He was the player he wanted. They were aware he may need half a season, a season, but were happy to wait if needed."
Despite these new burdens, PSG insiders have been hugely delighted with Doue's dedication and professionalism.

"The club have been very impressed with his fitness work, gym work," said Laurens.

It was the same at Rennes, with former coach Bruno Genesio saying: "Away from the pitch he's a dream: easy, calm, with a streak of leadership while still asking for advice. He's both care-free and conscientious in his work. He's already a pro in his head."

Doue first hit the radar when France won the European Under-17 Championship in Israel in 2022, then he was on the bench for the Olympic final in Paris two years later, coming on after 77 minutes when France lost 5-3 to Spain after extra time.

The Olympics arguably contributed to his slow start at PSG, lacking a proper pre-season, but he has been the beneficiary of careful management by Luis Enrique - who has worked individually with Doue, encouraging him through his quiet start.

He only made eight starts in the Champions League this season, with eight appearances as a substitute, scoring five goals and adding four assists.

It was at Anfield where he made his mark, coming on after 67 minutes to deliver a performance of remarkable maturity, capping it by being entrusted with the spot-kick that sent PSG through.

Doue has been kept out of the limelight by PSG, while the calming, grounded influence of his family is a huge factor.

Laurens explained: "The dad, Maho, is very influential in everything they do. Some families think their son is the next Cristiano Ronaldo, oblivious to everything going on on the pitch, but they were realistic.

"After the Arsenal game, where he did look out of his depth, they said he wasn't ready for the big step up another level. They understood he had to work a lot, he had to mature. They were very realistic about what he had to do. It was very impressive, very refreshing. They understood."

Doue has also had to adjust to life in the Paris goldfish bowl, away from quieter Rennes.

He lives in the fashionable Boulogne-Billancourt area and Pierre-Etienne Minonzio, based in Paris with influential sports paper L'Equipe, told BBC Sport: "Recently he was in a very popular shop. He was there just looking for a book when somebody spotted him.

"It was totally normal because he is so young, but maybe he did not understand it is going to be hard for him to be in crowded places in Paris.

"It is good that he thought he was not a star, but he probably hasn't been back. He's very into performance, wanting to be the best. If you tell him one of the next steps in his evolution is not to be seen so much in public, he will understand no problem."
It took until December for Doue to score his first PSG goal, in the 3-0 win at Red Bull Salzburg in the Champions League, but since then it has been lift-off.

"He was born in 2005 and in France's football world, everybody said the big thing in France born in 2005 was Mathys Tel," Minonzio said.

"For his generation, Doue was not the one because he was less talented than Tel, but when you get older the psychological attributes make a lot of difference and Doue has shown incredible mental strength.

"Everybody thought for this generation of players Tel would be the main guy, but now the talk is Doue."

And to crown his development, Doue was called up by France coach Didier Deschamps, overtaking two other players regarded as potential members of the new generation, Lyon forward Rayan Cherki and Maghnes Akliouche from Monaco.

Laurens said: "It all changed from a wider perspective after his debut for France. He was outstanding against Croatia. He was not scared, demanded the ball, scored a penalty. This guy had arrived."

In France, the general view is that Doue's form left Deschamps with no option.

Minonzio says: "Deschamps is obsessed with the Champions League. He wants his players to show him their ability in high-level games. He is always a little hesitant to take players who are very good in French league games but don't play in Champions League.

"It was obvious in March that Deschamps had no choice other than to select him."

Now the sky seems the limit, but there is still caution.

"A few months ago I would have told you the face of the new PSG would be Warren Zaire-Emery. Just 19, Parisian, lots of talent." says Minonzio.

"Everything he did was so impressive but you always have to wait to see how they react when there are problems.

"This is the fascination with Doue in France. We still don't know how good he will be, but at the moment he is free, does not ask any questions and life is good. He has been incredible."

Cunha completes 'dream' £62.5m Man Utd move - how does he fit in?
Brazil forward Matheus Cunha said his "dream" had become a reality after completing a £62.5m move to Manchester United.

United activated a release clause in Cunha's Wolves contract this month.

The deal, which was subject to a visa and a medical, has now been completed.

Cunha has signed a five-year contract, with the option of a further 12 months.

"It is hard to put into words my feelings about becoming a Manchester United player," he said.

"Ever since I was a child in Brazil watching Premier League games on TV at my grandmother's house, United was my favourite English team and I dreamed of wearing the red shirt.

"I want to thank my family and everyone who has helped me make that dream a reality."

Cunha scored 31 goals in 76 games in all competitions for Wolves after joining from Atletico Madrid in 2023.

"Bringing in Matheus was one of our main priorities for this summer, so we are delighted to have completed his signing so early in the window," said United director of football Jason Wilcox.

'United lucky they still have historic appeal'
After United scored a record low of 44 goals in 38 Premier League matches last season, bolstering the attack was a clear priority for manager Ruben Amorim.

Although not a traditional centre-forward, Cunha scored 27 goals in 65 league games for Wolves in the past two seasons.

Winger Antony and striker Rasmus Hojlund have arrived at Old Trafford for big transfer fees in recent years and struggled to adapt to the Premier League.

Newcastle United, who will play in the Champions League next season, were interested in signing Cunha.

United will not play European football next season and it is more than three years since they last reached the Champions League knockout stages.

"United are lucky they still have their historic appeal and reputation as a club, so players of the Brazilian's quality and potential want to move there," former England midfielder Fara Williams told BBC Sport.

"There is no doubt he improves the squad."

Cunha was the heartbeat of Wolves' attacking threat in the past two seasons, scoring crucial goals, linking up play and unpicking defences with moments of brilliance.

"Cunha has everything a United team would want," said Williams.

"You cannot question the qualities he possesses and the attitude he has in terms of wanting to do anything to win."

Last season Cunha scored six goals from outside the penalty area and had 51 attempts on target in all competitions, the same figures as United's Bruno Fernandes for United.

'Cunha fits Amorim's system'
After regularly playing as a number nine in his first full season at Wolves, Cunha developed into an attacking midfielder during his second year at Molineux.

Playing as a left-sided number 10 last term, Cunha often dropped deep to retrieve possession.

Former Wolves coach Edu Rubio said: "He needed some time to adapt to English football but now he is showing his true quality.

"Cunha can help United to get the ball up the pitch quicker with his great dribbling skills and his excellent driving runs which can break opposition lines so effectively.

"He is a top player with great technical ability. He can play as an eight, as a 10, second striker, striker - so he fits very well in Ruben's 3-4-2-1 system.

"He also likes to gravitate to the flank and come inside to hurt the opposition by penetrating into the box with and without the ball.

"United will need to offer him some freedom at front, giving him the opportunity to rotate and exchange positions across the attacking lines.

"In return he can offer United an attacking threat and hard work off the ball too."

Manchester United's new signing Matheus Cunha says he has "dreamed" of a move to the Red Devils since he was a child watching the Premier League at his grandmother's house.

Cunha scored 15 times and assisted on six occasions in the league for Wolves last season, contributing to 21 of the club's 54 goals in the competition.

"It is hard to put into words my feelings about becoming a Manchester United player," said Cunha.

"Ever since I was a child in Brazil watching Premier League games on TV at my grandmother's house, United was my favourite English team and I dreamed of wearing the red shirt. I want to thank my family and everyone who has helped me make that dream a reality.

"I can't wait for the start of pre-season to get to know my team-mates and prepare for the season ahead. All my focus is now on working hard to become a valuable part of the team, and helping get this club back to the top."

Cunha's combined 21 goals and assists is better than any United player has managed in either of the past two Premier League seasons.

In 2024-25, captain Bruno Fernandes produced eight goals and 11 assists, while in the previous season his combined total was 18.

United director of football Jason Wilcox said: "Bringing in Matheus was one of our main priorities for this summer.

"He has proved his ability to succeed in the Premier League as one of the most exciting and productive forwards in England during his time at Wolves, and before that in Spain and Germany.

"He has all the qualities we are looking for as we seek to build a strong, dynamic and entertaining team capable of challenging for the biggest honours."
Manchester United have unveiled their home kit for the 2025-26 season.

The club says it has been inspired by Old Trafford and features different shades of red to signify the different parts of the ground, which Sir Jim Ratcliffe confirmed earlier this year would be demolished as part of his £2bn new stadium plans.

It also contains a "Theatre of Dreams" inscription on the back of the collar.

"The colour red is fundamental to the club's DNA. There have been many different expressions of it over the years and, for this season, we wanted to do something a little different, using the sleeves as a canvas," Adidas senior design director Jurgen Rank.

"The abstract graphic stays true to the club's DNA while providing an innovative look and feel to an otherwise classy and classic jersey."

United say there are two versions of the shirt - one for the players, which they have been consulted on and features the latest technology available to manufacturers Adidas, and a fan version, which the club says helps keep the body dry.

Let us know what you think of the new kit here

Study recommends mandatory four-week break for players
Professional footballers should be allowed at least a four-week off-season break, plus a minimum four-week retraining period before a return to competition, according to a new report.

The study, released on Thursday by global players' union Fifpro, led to 70 medical and performance experts agreeing on 12 safeguards they want to introduce in a bid to protect players from exhaustion and excessive workload.

Fifpro said it represents the most extensive expert consensus to date on safeguards against excessive workload in professional football.

More than 75% agreement was required among participants to establish each recommendation.

Among the recommendations are:

a four-week off-season break

mandatory mid-season breaks

a minimum four-week retraining period before a return to competitive action

and mandatory consideration of the travel burden on players.

"This study presents safety standards based on the considered and independent opinions of medical and performance experts working in professional football who understand the mental and physical strain placed on players," Professor Doctor Vincent Gouttebarge, Fifpro medical director, said.

"If we can all agree that health comes first, then we should take steps to implement these safeguards."

The release of the report comes just days before the opening game of the Fifa Club World Cup in the United States.

Premier League sides Manchester City and Chelsea are both involved in the tournament, which concludes on 13 July.

Should either reach the final, players will have a gap of just five weeks before the Premier League season begins on 15 August.

Chelsea's first game of the Club World Cup takes place on 16 June, just 19 days after their Conference League final triumph over Real Betis.

In September, a week prior to suffering an ACL injury, City midfielder Rodri said players were close to going on strike because of the increase in games, while team-mate Manuel Akanji suggested he would have to retire at 30-years-old as a result of the lack of breaks in the calendar.

In October, Fifpro filed a legal complaint with the European Commission over what it said was Fifa's "abuse of dominance," which was specifically related to the Club World Cup.

Ajax, Agony and a Stunning Title Collapse
After one of the worst seasons in recent memory, Ajax found themselves standing on the brink of an unlikely 37th Eredivisie title but they blew it in spectacular style
When exploring the old canals of Amsterdam, a short walk from the tourist centre, you get a sense of history and tranquillity in equal measure.

Yet just a few miles away, the latter has been conspicuous by its absence at the Johan Cruyff Arena, home of one of Europe’s great old clubs, Ajax.

Following their worst domestic season in almost a quarter of a century in 23/24 - a campaign encompassing managerial and sporting director sackings, fan riots at matches, high player turnover and an aggregate 10-0 loss to the auld enemy Feyenoord - the team under new Italian coach Francesco Farioli unexpectedly found itself in a title race.
A pragmatic approach under the 36-year-old that was the antithesis of the ‘Total Football’ Cruyffian style demanded by fans and ex-players saw Ajax standing on the brink of an unlikely 37th Eredivisie title.

With six games left, they still had a 9-point cushion at the top over defending Champions PSV Eindhoven, an impressive feat in itself considering PSV had led by the same margin in December.
Having hit the front in mid-February, Ajax looked like they were in cruise control.

It was stodgy and tough to watch, but ultimately effective – they took 19 points from 21 in this period, including a comprehensive win in Eindhoven.

However, by the final day, the lead had gone. With the finishing line in sight, the wheels totally fell off.

The engine of Dutch football’s most successful club spluttered and stalled.

Over the course of four matches in what should have been a relatively gentle run-in 10 points were dropped, only 3 goals scored, and 10 conceded.

By the final round of fixtures, the destiny that Ajax had held firmly in its hands had been let slip.

The advantage was not just handed to PSV but gift-wrapped with a ribbon and delivered first-class.
The joy opposition fans have when mocking a side for ‘bottling it’ often comes with the acceptance that it's unlikely to come to fruition.

Yet with each stumble from Ajax on their final lap towards the title, those hoping for a fall became increasingly convinced that it could happen.

The post-match clip of PSV fans at Philips Stadion, upon realising that 10-man Groningen had scored the 99th-minute equaliser to send PSV one point clear with a game to go, crystallised the moment when simple hope was instantly transformed into pure joy and incredulity.
It’s no wonder fans of the ‘Rood-witten’ were shocked.

There were several moments when the trophy could have been placed into the hands of Ajax Captain Jordan Henderson, who is ranked at No.20 in FourFourTwo's list of the best Premier League midfielders of all time.

On matchday 36 out of 38, with Ajax still four points clear, the footballing Gods conspired to create a situation in which an in-form Feyenoord, led by Robin van Persie, could give Ajax matchpoint if they were to beat PSV in Rotterdam.

A 2-0 half-time lead had the champagne on ice in Amsterdam.

Then Noah Lang capped off an astonishing comeback with a 99th-minute winner (that number again), and the momentum and belief seemed to visually evaporate from Ajax players and fans alike.

Hours later, a shocking home performance to lose 0-3 to NEC Nijmegen had the gap down to just one. It was the first time NEC had ever won at Ajax.

The trophy was ready to be presented three days later in Groningen, should Ajax win and PSV falter.

Cue the aforementioned collapse that left Wout Weghorst running from the pitch in tears at full-time.

Even on the final day, the glory was cruelly dangled tantalising out of reach.

In another twist of footballing fate, Maurice Steijn, the man unceremoniously booted out of Ajax in October 2023, had a chance to save his old employers.

On 52 minutes, his Sparta Rotterdam equalised, and with Ajax leading Twente, the title was heading to Amsterdam again.

Yet within minutes, like a bully in the playground stealing someone’s lunch money, Luuk de Jong netted his 57th League goal since returning in 2022, and the hope was well and truly extinguished.

The back-to-back PSV titles had been secured.

The right side won in the end
The former had six players hitting double figures in the league, the latter only one with Weghorst reaching 10 (eight of Oliver Edvardsen’s goals came for Go Ahead Eagles before he joined in January).

The first-choice striker Brian Brobbey reached the almighty total of four, fewer than the top scorers of the relegated Almere City and RKC Waalwijk.

The pre-season decision to clean up previous Technical Director Sven Mislintat’s supposedly dirty attacking laundry perhaps proved to be a mistake, with George Mikautadze having a superb season and well-fitted for Farioli’s style of play.

Ditto Steven Bergwijn, albeit in the Saudi Pro League.

A dramatic race European football needed
Small moments of drama can swing and decide a title race.

Yet rarely do so many occur in such a short space of time.

At moments over the course of the final few weeks, it felt like a binge-worthy TV show with so many cliff-hangers that you needed to pause it just to catch your breath.

And in a season in which we failed to get tense title races in the Premier League, League 1, the Bundesliga and La Liga, the Eredivisie delivered the theatre and narrative that has been sparse across much of European football.

Indeed, it has been lacking in the Netherlands itself, with this the first time in eight years that the race had gone to the final match.

The resignation of Farioli, a day after his own tears on the pitch once 2nd place was confirmed, was a fitting finale to a captivating story full of twists and turns.

Perhaps it was the fact that Ajax and PSV each had almost as many flaws as they did strengths that meant it was such a roller-coaster of a ride.

As fans, it shows us that a memorable title race isn’t always about the number of points or even the quality.

What keeps us gripped to the edges of our seats is often just as much about the unpredictability and the deficiencies.

The sudden swings of the proverbial pendulum.

In an age of strict systems and predictable styles, of the watering down of individual flair at the altar of wider structure, it was refreshing to have a battle that was just pure chaos.

You may not follow the Eredivisie. You might even look down on it.

Yet this season certainly served up the kind of emotion and escapism that football is ultimately all about.

Is this the biggest collapse in EFL history?
By Ryan Dabbs published 28 April 2025
The EFL is often dramatic, but even for its standards 2024/25 has shown a collapse of great magnitude…
The English Football League never ceases to entertain with dramatic storylines and intense events, with promotions, relegations and high-scoring goalfests continuously bringing the action each and every season.

Sometimes, though, there are occasions when a title race is a formality and the relegation picture becomes largely clear before the final throes of the campaign. League One largely epitomises that this season, with Birmingham the runaway league leaders and both Shrewsbury and Burton Albion condemned to relegation a lot earlier than they would've liked.

League Two also looked to be following in a similar vein back in January, but what has since transpired is arguably one of the greatest collapses in EFL history.
After the 27th game of the season on January 18, Walsall were 12 points clear of second-placed Crewe at the top of the League Two table and were a full 15 points ahead of AFC Wimbledon in fourth place. The Saddlers had lost just three times all season and had just beaten MK Dons 4-2 as part of a nine-game winning streak.

Promotion to League One looked an inevitability.
Since then, though, Walsall have won just two times in 19 games - form that would have invariably had them in the two relegation spots if it continued throughout the season. Heading into the final match of 2024/25, Walsall are now fourth and look like having to settle for a play-off spot - though they could still break into the top three if they better Bradford's result on the final day of the season.

Such a demise can be traced back to the departure of Nathan Lowe in January. The teenage forward scored 15 goals in 22 games in League Two during his loan spell from Stoke, with the Potters recalling him on January 12. During his half-season at Bescot Stadium, Lowe did enough to win the League Two Young Player of the Season award.
And while the youngster has been used sparingly at Stoke since returning, making just nine appearances, Walsall managed just one win before their wretched downturn in form started once Lowe left.

There is also the issue of manager Mat Sadler. Though he signed a new three-and-a-half-year deal with Walsall on January 7, a day after the Saddlers reportedly rejected Plymouth Argyle's approach to speak with the manager, it's difficult to ascertain just how much of an effect the interest from a Championship side.
Saddler must certainly have recognised that, while there's a two-league gap between them right now, both clubs could still end up facing each other in League One in 2025/26. That's certainly no guarantee with the drama the play-offs can throw up, though.

In FourFourTwo's view, Walsall are still exceeding expectations even as they sit fourth in League Two, regardless of their dominant first half of the campaign. At the start of 2024/25, FFT predicted that Walsall would finish 11th - if they weren't so consistently brilliant and then so consistently terrible, there wouldn't have been any mention of a collapse on their end.

League Two final day preview: What's on the line for promotion, play-offs and relegation?
Only two of the three automatic promotion places have been filled while there's a multi-way battle for the playoff spots
The League Two season is almost at a close, but there's still loads to play for on the final day at the top end of the division.

The race for promotion has made for compelling watching with the top sides all exchanging places over the past few months.

The final day of the season promises to be just as gripping, with all 12 games kicking off at 3pm on Saturday afternoon.
Doncaster Rovers and Port Vale were both promoted last weekend, with Donny holding a one-point lead at the top of the table that they will want to maintain to call themselves champions.

That leaves just one final place to fill for the three automatic promotion spots - and any one of three sides could clinch it.

After missing out on ending the season early by losing to Doncaster last week, Bradford City (75 points) still hold the edge. A win for them at home to Fleetwood would definitely send them up. Bradford have not won any of their past four in the league.

With their superior goal difference, Walsall (74 points) would overtake Bradford by bettering the Bantams' result - an incredible position for the Sadlers to be in given they have not having won any of their past 13 league games. They visit Crewe Alexandra for their final game.
Bradford and Walsall's poor form means we cannot rule out Notts County (72 points) sneaking into the top three on the final day. Their goal difference is currently level with Walsall's and better than Bradford's.

That means that if County win at home to already-promoted Doncaster, Bradford lose, and Walsall get anything less than a win, County will take third place and win automatic promotion.
Whoever misses out in the automatic promotion race at least has the consolation prize of being guaranteed a second chance via the play-offs.

That leaves two more places in the semi-finals, with five sides still in contention.

AFC Wimbledon (70 points) realistically need just one more point to ensure they cross the line thanks to their enormous goal difference advantage.

The problem there is they are away to Grimsby Town (68 points), who are currently just outside the play-off places with a far inferior goal difference to Salford City (68 points).

That means Grimsby's visit from the Dons is a must-win for the hosts - and Grimsby would be guaranteed a play-off place if they can get the job done.

That head-to-head on the banks of the Humber means that Salford would also be guaranteed a play-off place with a win in their own game. They visit already-relegated Carlisle, where a draw could also be enough for Salford as long as neither Grimsby nor Chesterfield win their own games.
Speaking of which... Chesterfield (67 points) and Colchester United (66 points) are still in with a shot if results go their way.

There's two different ways Chesterfield could do it. Most simply, if they win away to Accrington and both Salford and Grimsby drop points, the play-off place is theirs.

A victorious Chesterfield would also be assured of overtaking a defeated Wimbledon thanks to the way goal difference and goals scored shakes out. If Salford were to simultaneously drop points, that would be enough to get Chesterfield into the play-offs alongside Grimsby.

Colchester would need all the other results to fall into their lap even if they win at home to Barrow. Short of making up a five-goal swing in goal difference, Colchester realistically need to win, and for Salford to lose, and for Grimsby and Chesterfield both to drop points.

Don't worry; after all those headachey permutations, at the top end, there's nothing to discuss down at the bottom.

Morecambe and Carlisle United are already relegated. Done.

The English league where six teams could become champions on the final day of the season
No Premier League title race? This competition's got you covered
o relegation battle. A lacklustre title race. Boresome VAR controversy. Perhaps there’s no surprise that in recent weeks, and months, there have been claims that the 2024/25 Premier League is one of the most boring campaigns in recent memory.

However, there is still lots riding on the last month of the season, with the race for Europe hotting up, the potential for a smaller team lifting the FA Cup, and four English sides vying for a European trophy.

Yet, there have been no thrills in regard to title races and relegation. Well, if it’s last-day heroics you’re looking for, then there’s no need to go abroad, as one English division has six teams all battling to win the league, with just one game left.
The National League South is 45 games into their 46-match season, yet just three points separate first-placed Truro City and sixth-placed Dorking Wanderers – meaning all of the top six sides could lift the league trophy on 26 April.

It is set to be an incredible final day, with Torquay United, Eastbourne Borough, Worthing, and Boreham Wood still in the mix. What makes the final day even more remarkable is that none of the top six face each other.

The bottom of the National League South
It leaves Truro City with a big advantage, as they know that a win at home to 21st placed St Albans should be enough to seal the title unless Torquay United can win by three goals more than Truro do when they face 11th placed Hemel Hempstead Town.

A further layer of intrigue is added as a win for St Albans City would not only stop Truro from becoming champions but also potentially keep them in the division, as they sit in the relegation zone, level on points with Salisbury, who are 20th and currently safe from relegation.
Worthing, who are one point off leaders Truro, face Enfield Town. Should Enfield lose, this could potentially hand Worthing the title, and also relegate Enfield, if St Albans City and Salisbury both earn three points.

With just one game to go, there’s a multitude of permutations leaving nine of the league’s 24 clubs still unsure if they will be playing in the same division next season. Only the league champions are automatically promoted to the National League, giving even more importance to that coveted first-place spot.
Dorking Wanderers are one of those sides, although they would need a miracle if they were to somehow end up top of the pile.

Founded in 1999 by businessman Marc White, alongside his friends Peter Buckland, Mark Lewington, Ian Davidson, Lee Spickett, and Penny Gregg, Dorking have seen a remarkable rise. The group had become disheartened by the way Wimbledon, the club where they held season tickets, was being run during their tenure in the Premier League.

After 26 years and 12 promotions, Dorking have worked their way up to the National League South, with Marc White acting as Chairman and manager of the club for all those years.

White’s charisma and hilarious touchline antics have also earned Dorking nearly 100k followers across Instagram and TikTok, as well as 183k subscribers on the YouTube channel Bunch of Amateurs. Whilst their promotion is unlikely, their content after the final game of the season is set to be a worthy watch.

League One final day preview: What's on the line for promotion, play-offs and relegation?
We're going to level with you: we really don't need a full piece for this.

The final day of the League One season has an almost total lack of jeopardy at stake, with just one key position still to be decided.

Still, let's check in on the state of play going into Saturday's 3pm kick-offs anyway…
Already sewn up, mate. Birmingham City absolutely romped to the title and are well past the 100 point mark. They'd finish with a pleasingly palindromic 111 points if they win away to relegated Cambridge on the final day.

Joining them in the Championship next year are Wrexham, who capitalised on Wycombe's back-to-back defeats to go five points clear in second ahead of the final day. The Welsh club visit Lincoln in an absolutely nothing game on Saturday.
We usually have a bit of a multi-way battle going on for the top six going into the final round of fixtures. Not this time. Stupid League One. Why can't you be more like League Two and the Championship?

Stockport County, Wycombe Wanderers and Charlton Athletic are all certain of a play-off place already, meaning that all that's at stake on Saturday is the exact order they'll finish in and thus who they will each face in the semi-finals.Stockport and Wycombe face each other, however, meaning that Charlton - currently two points behind both County and Wanderers - can't get third unless they beat Burton by at least six goals while the game at Edgeley Park ends in a draw.Bolton and Huddersfield's appalling form saw both sides drop out of the race for sixth place early, so it's now down to just Leyton Orient and Reading to battle it out.

The two sides are level on points with Orient eight goals better off in the goal difference column. They will visit an atrociously out-of-form Huddersfield, with Orient hoping to make it six wins in a row and all but guarantee that final play-off place.

Troubled Reading will meanwhile host mid-table Barnsley, and quite simply need to better Orient's result to overtake tchem. Yep, all sewn up at the bottom too.

Shrewsbury Town, Cambridge United, Bristol Rovers and Crawley are all League Two bound already after Burton Albion and Northampton did enough to push themselves mathematically clear of the bottom four.

What every Premier League team has to play for on the last game of the season
It's been a long season, with just one more gameweek left to play
After 37 gameweeks the Premier League is finally coming to an end. Liverpool are champions, whilst Southampton, Ipswich and Leicester have all been relegated. There's been shocks, screamers, controversy and so much more.

But it's not over just yet. There's still money, pride and European qualification to play for.

Here, FourFourTwo runs you through what each team has to play for in the final game of the Premier League season.
For the Premier League champions, the final game of the season, at home to Crystal Palace, is effectively one big party, with nothing on the line.

A loss would give them the eighth-lowest points tally of any Premier League winning side, but Arne Slot and co will surely see that as irrelevant.

A win would make it their fourth-highest Premier League points tally. Arsenal’s win over Newcastle last week all but secured their third consecutive second-placed finish in the Premier League.Mikel Arteta’s side would have to lose away to Southampton and see Manchester City overturn an eight-goal deficit if they were to drop down to third.

3. Manchester City Unusually for Manchester City, the final day of the season is about holding on to Champions League qualification rather than celebrating with the Premier League trophy.

A win away at Fulham for Pep Guardiola’s side would confirm their place in Europe’s top competition, but a draw or loss could see them drop out of the top five if Newcastle, Chelsea, and Aston Villa all win. The Geordies are looking to add to their Carabao Cup triumph by qualifying for the Champions League for the second time in three seasons.

They play Everton at home knowing that three points will be enough to seal a top-five place, with Aston Villa 13 behind on goal difference despite being on the same number of points. Draw or lose and results will have to swing the right way or they could drop out of the top five. The highest stakes game of the final day of the Premier League season sees Chelsea travel to top-five rivals Nottingham Forest.

With their superior goal difference to Aston Villa, a win for Chelsea is enough, but a draw would leave them reliant on Villa failing to beat a Manchester United side who have lost 18 games this season.

A loss would see Nottingham Forest knock them out of the Champions League spots.

6. Aston Villa The fate of Unai Emery’s side is largely out of their control. Villa need to win at Old Trafford to ensure they remain in the conversation for Champions League spots, but if Chelsea, Newcastle and Manchester City all win, they can only watch on in disappointment.

However, if City lose or Chelsea and Newcastle fail to win and Villa take three points in Manchester, then they will qualify for the prestigious competition.

7. Nottingham Forest Few predicted Forest’s remarkable success this season. Yet they have faltered in recent weeks, winning just two of their last seven.

The saving grace is that they have one final game to fix their recent run of poor form. Simply, they must beat Chelsea at home to qualify for the Champions League.

Anything else will see them qualify for the Europa League, if they finish sixth (through a draw and Aston Villa losing), or the Conference League, if they finish seventh (through a draw or loss and Aston Villa drawing or winning).

Regardless, they have secured some form of European football next season. And breathe!

8. Brighton and Hove Albion While most of the country was celebrating Crystal Palace’s emotional FA Cup victory, Brighton were cursing their rivals. That’s because by winning the FA Cup, Palace have qualified for the Europa League, meaning eighth place will not qualify for the UEFA Conference League – unless one particular scenario happens. This is where it gets complicated.

First of all, Brighton need to win away at Tottenham to secure eighth (Brentford sit three points behind them with a better goal difference). Then they need Chelsea to win the Conference League AND finish seventh, or for Chelsea to finish sixth and Newcastle seventh.

So, ideally Brighton need a defeat for Chelsea on Sunday, a win or draw for Aston Villa at Manchester United, and for Chelsea to beat Real Betis in the Conference League final next week.

In that scenario, Chelsea would enter the Europa League as Conference League winners. Got it?
 Brentford could also be reliant on a Chelsea loss in the Premier League and a win in the Conference League final, but only if they beat Wolves away from home and Brighton lose at Tottenham.

The Bees could finish as high as eighth and as low as eleventh, depending on other results. Fulham
9. Brentford Brighton’s win against Liverpool dashed any hope that Fulham had of qualifying for Europe. The Athletic have reported that each place in the Premier League is worth around £2.8 million, due to the merit payments that teams receive depending on where they finish.

Fulham could finish ninth, but could also finish eleventh, so Marco Silva’s side are playing for money alone, given they have already secured their highest-ever Premier League points tally.
Like Fulham, Bournemouth have secured their best-ever points tally in an impressive season.

They can’t beat their highest ever finish, ninth in 2016/17, but they can match it if they beat Leicester at home, and Brentford and Fulham fail to win. The FA Cup winners head to Anfield on the final day of the season to join Liverpool’s party. Palace can’t finish lower than their current position of 12th, and have already secured European football through that FA Cup win.

They could finish ninth if they shock Liverpool and results go their way, although that seems an unlikely scenario. Along with Southampton and Liverpool, Everton are one of three teams that cannot change their position on the last game of the season. Last season, 13th place secured around £13 million in merit payments. After their final game at Goodison Park, they head to Newcastle to play for pride and to spoil Newcastle’s Champions League aspirations.
Vitor Pereira has worked wonders at Wolves since arriving in December 2024, earning him a nomination for the Premier League’s Manager of the Season.

They sit safely in 14th, hosting Brentford on the last day of the season. A win would net them roughly £9 million more than a loss, which could see them finish 17th.

They are also looking to finish above both Manchester United and Tottenham Hotspur for the first time in Premier League history. A loss away to Ipswich would make it West Ham's fourth-lowest points tally in Premier League history – even lower than the 2002/03 season, where they were relegated.

Like Wolves, their finishing position could impact their end-of-season merit payments by a swing of around £9 million. The list of records that Manchester United have broken and will break is too long to even attempt to summarise.

Regardless of their result at home to Aston Villa, it is their lowest-ever finish and lowest-ever points tally in the Premier League.

Sunday’s match could either be a celebration following a Europa League final, or a chance to claw back a tiny shred of pride by apologising to supporters for a terrible campaign with a positive performance. Spurs host Brighton with a narrative remarkably similar to Manchester United. Whether it will be a celebration or commiseration remains to be seen.

A win could take them up to 14th, again dependent on other results, which would ensure it is not their lowest-ever Premier League finish, having ended 1993/94 in 15th. Relegation confirmed, managerial uncertainty, and losing club legend Jamie Vardy – it’s been tough for Leicester this year.

A trip to Bournemouth does not bode well, with the Foxes playing to prove to the club’s hierarchy that Ruud Van Nistelrooy is the man to take them forward in the long run, and an extra £3 million to spend over the summer as they prepare for life back in the Championship. Ipswich host West Ham on the last day of the 2024/25 campaign. The result will not change the simple fact that it is their worst season in Premier League history, winning a record low four games.

Pride and that valuable £3 million are again all to play for. Like so many of the current bottom five, Southampton broke unwanted records this year. On the plus side, they avoided Derby County’s record of the fewest points in Premier League history. They host Arsenal with their position immovable.

FIFA — SOCCER’S WORLD GOVERNING BODY
Founded in 1904 to provide unity among national soccer associations, the Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) boasts 211 members, rivaling that of the United Nations, and is arguably the most prestigious sports organization in the world.

FIFA was established on May 21, 1904, by seven national associations — Belgium, Denmark, France, Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland — to “promote the game of Association Football (as opposed to rugby or American football), to foster friendly relations among National Associations, Confederations, and their officials and players, by promoting the organization of football matches at all levels, and to control every type of association football by taking steps as shall be deemed necessary or advisable.”

FIFA’s birth was a result of the growing number of international games shortly after the dawn of the 20th century. Soccer leaders in Europe felt that such expanded competition required a governing body, and under the leadership of Robert Guerin, a French journalist, the seven founding members gathered in Paris to shape the future of the sport. Guerin, FIFA’s first president, presided over the organization from 1904 to 1906. Seven other men have also served as FIFA president, including Jules Rimet for 33 years from 1921 to 1954.

Currently, Italy’s Gianni Infantino serves as FIFA president, having been elected in 2016’s Extraordinary Congress held in the wake of corruption allegations against numerous FIFA Officials that resulted in former president Joseph “Sepp” Blatter stepping aside and then being banned from FIFA by its Ethics Committee.

Under FIFA’s governance soccer has become the world’s most popular sport. According to the Federation’s 2006 “Big Count,” the game is played by more than 150 million registered athletes — including 10 million women — and viewed by billions of fans in stadiums and on television worldwide. The 2014 World Cup in Brazil was broadcast in more than 200 countries. Inside the stadiums, a total of 3,429,873 spectators attended the 64 matches – an average of 53,592 per match – the second highest aggregate attendance behind USA 1994 (68,991).

As soccer’s ultimate administrative authority, FIFA governs all facets of the game: regulating the rules of play, overseeing the transfers of players internationally, organizing international competitions such as the FIFA World Cup, establishing standards for refereeing, coaching and sports medicine, and encouraging soccer’s development around the world.

Among the official world championships staged by FIFA are the World Cup, the Women’s World Cup, the Under-20 World Cup, the Under-20 Women’s World Cup, the Under-17 World Cup, the Under-17 Women’s World Cup, the FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup and the Futsal World Cup. Additionally, FIFA oversees the men’s and women’s Olympic Football Tournament staged under the auspices of the International Olympic Committee every four years. FIFA has also staged the FIFA Confederations Cup, a competition between each of its confederations' champions, and the FIFA Club World Cup, which was held at the beginning of 2000 for the first time in Brazil.

Twenty-six World Cup winners headline Club World Cup squad announcement
FIFA Club World Cup 2025™ squad lists contain more FIFA World Cup™ winners than squads who competed in the 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup tournaments
The last four world champion nations are represented among the 32 participating clubs, including 13 of Argentina’s 2022-winning squad
Players representing 81 countries will feature in the most inclusive global club tournament ever, which kicks off on Saturday, 14 June
The 32 participating clubs have submitted their squad lists for the FIFA Club World Cup 2025™ and are headlined by some of the greatest players to have competed on the global stage over the last two decades, including 26 FIFA World Cup™ winners.

The new FIFA Club World Cup will see the world’s top 32 club teams compete to be crowned the first true global club world champions across 63 games in 12 venues and 11 Host Cities in the United States (US) – Atlanta, Charlotte, Cincinnati, Los Angeles, Miami, Nashville, New York New Jersey, Orlando, Philadelphia, Seattle and Washington, D.C..

No fewer than 13 of the Argentina squad that lifted international football’s biggest prize in Qatar in 2022 will feature, led by Inter Miami CF’s Lionel Messi, who is likely to feature in the opening game against Al Ahly FC on Saturday 14 June.There are nine of France’s victorious 2018 vintage, including Real Madrid C. F. star Kylian Mbappé and Les Bleus’ then-captain Hugo Lloris of Los Angeles Football Club. Another three, Ousmane Dembélé, Lucas Hernandez and Presnel Kimpembe, come to the US as European club champions having claimed that title late last month with Paris Saint-Germain.

“The list of participants at the inaugural 32-team FIFA Club World Cup is a true reflection of a tournament that will be the most competitive and inclusive of global football, bringing together the best talents from every continent to decide the true FIFA world club champion,” said FIFA President Gianni Infantino. “We have 26 players who will be seeking to be among the first group of stars to raise two World Cups: the FIFA World Cup and the FIFA Club World Cup. That is history in the making. Also, with 81 countries represented, the FIFA Club World Cup is helping to make football truly global. The tournament will be the dream of every fan, a month-long football feast.”

Spanish side Atlético de Madrid boast the most FIFA World Cup winners with six while Argentinian giants CA River Plate are next-best with four. The past four world champion nations will each be represented as FC Bayern München’s Thomas Müller and Manuel Neuer were in the Germany squad that won in Brazil in 2014, while Inter Miami’s Sergio Busquets and CF Monterrey’s Sergio Ramos were part of the Spain side that triumphed in South Africa in 2010 alongside Real Madrid CF’s new coach Xabi Alonso. Impressively, nine of the 11 Host Cities will host at least one group-stage game potentially featuring a FIFA World Cup winner, giving the entire fanbase across the US the opportunity to watch the world’s greatest players in person.

Highlighting the global nature of the tournament, the FIFA Club World Cup will see players from all six confederations and 81 countries participating in the tournament, including 22 nations that have never before played in a FIFA World Cup.

Participating clubs were able to name an initial squad of between 26 and 35 players for the new competition with most having reinforced their squad during the extraordinary transfer window that was open from 1 to 10 June. In a flurry of activity, 58 new players were registered for a total value of USD 480.4 million, emphasising the ambitions of clubs as they head into the new global showpiece. In line with the applicable regulations, there is the potential for participating clubs to replace and add players during a restricted in-competition period from 27 June to 3 July 2025 within a set limit and according to specific limitations. The objective is to encourage clubs and players whose contracts are expiring to find an appropriate solution to facilitate the players’ participation. This will ensure the best players will be playing, while allowing clubs to add new recruits even during the tournament.

DAZN, the world’s leading sports entertainment platform, is the exclusive global broadcaster of the FIFA Club World Cup 2025, making every match of the tournament available for free to fans anywhere in the world.

Since it began back in 1888, football has become bigger, better and far more of a spectacle. But where does it stop and at what cost to the wellbeing of players? 
Premier League, Champions League, Europa League, Carabao Cup, FA Cup are leagues and competitions that English football teams participate in- not to mention The Euros and World Cup for their national teams.

UEFA Champions League Expands: More Games, More Pressure
In recent news, UEFA Champions League announced that they’d be adding extra games into the stages, making the competition longer and more exciting for fans. The combination of such extravagant competitions, with their training and travelling, means that it can become very tiring and have negative impacts on players’ wellbeing.

Player Concerns: More Games, Less Focus on Wellbeing
This announcement has been met with criticism from players as they haven’t been consulted about this and fear that it’ll affect their wellbeing. Whilst players understand fans may want more games and chances to see their beloved teams at centre stage, their wellbeing should be considered in such decisions as they already lead such strict training and game schedules. Players also have to deal with scrutiny on global scales as well as pressures from supporters and themselves. 

Travel and Training: The Hidden Strains of Football’s Expanding Schedule
Training hard for the competitions and leagues is something they’re used to, but if they’re pushed too far and if the competitions keep growing, their performances will drop as they can’t keep up due to tiredness and mental stress or pressure. Champions League goes all across Europe, and so it involves a lot of travel, which can affect training and their mental wellbeing- sometimes, they just want to be home.

Balancing Performance and Wellbeing for Peak Football Quality
Not only do players and teams want to win, but they value the actual game and performances; they want to play at such high standards and execute brilliantly played football for themselves and for supporters. Overall, the quality of their performance, and their wellbeing (both mental and physical) will worsen if their wellbeing is neglected.

The Importance of Investing in Player Wellbeing
The Clubs or the players may not have a say in the Leagues and/ or Cup competitions, but they do have a choice to invest in wellbeing themselves. Investing in exceptional occupational health would mean that players’ mental and physical wellbeing becomes a priority no matter what and they can help ease any struggles with their ever-growing, heavy responsibilities and performances.

UKIM’s Wellbeing in Sports Package: Supporting Players On and Off the Pitch
At UKIM Occupational Health & Wellbeing, we developed our bespoke Wellbeing in Sports package because we understand the mental challenges that go hand-in-hand with being a professional player. With our in-house team of psychologists, counsellors, and occupational health experts, there’s an abundance of tailored support available to help players navigate their mental health and wellbeing, both on and off the pitch.

You rarely get a second chance to say goodbye. 

I guess I must be one of the lucky ones in football, because I’m getting that chance now. 

You see, it was actually supposed to be goodbye last summer. I had said yes to Bayern Munich and everything was 90% done. My bags were packed — literally. But it turns out that in the business of football, 90% means nothing. I’d gone along with the team to our pre-season camp, even though I knew I could get the call at any moment, because I wanted to be with my brothers — some of the guys I had known for almost 10 years. With so much uncertainty, I really needed that sense of routine. Just being able to laugh with the guys, it helped me so much. 

One day, when it looked like the deal was done, I got a text from Xabi. 

“Jona, let’s have a chat.”

We went to the meeting room, and Xabi, he has this natural aura ...... it’s hard to even say what it is, but it’s in the way he speaks and looks you in the eye. Sincerity like that can be rare in football. You know what he did as a player, but it’s even more about how he treats you as a person. He commands absolute respect. 

We had quite a deep chat. I don’t want to go into the exact details of what he said, but I’d been at Leverkusen for nine years, and he knew exactly how much this club means to me. He began talking about the qualities I bring to the team, and the influence I had on my teammates, and I got the feeling that he really saw me as someone special. 

He was not speaking to me as the legend. He was simply speaking to me as a person. 

Finally he said, “All the transfer stuff, all the talk about your contract ... Take that out. You are here right now, and as long as you are here, I will support you.”

Jonathan Tah | A Proper Goodbye | The Players' Tribune
Jörg Schüler/Bayer 04 Leverkusen via Getty
To hear that from him ..... yeah, I was emotional. 

He could have frozen me out. He could have made me train with the reserves. He could have treated me like a stranger. 

But no, he’s Xabi. He treated me like family. 

When I went home and told my wife about that conversation, she cried. 

She said, “Jona, forget about the football. This is more than just a job. Look at the friendships you’ve made here. Look how beautiful it is.”


It’s funny, for the last three months, it’s been nothing but rumors. You get sick of seeing your own name on social media. It’s all a little bit ridiculous. 

I don’t think people understand how bizarre it is when you’re about to move. It’s not like FIFA on the PlayStation, you know? You’re at home on the couch, trying to figure out what is going on, and there are so many people texting you randomly, going, “Hey Jona, you should go to this club, bro.”

I’m like, “Oh really? And are you their manager? Because they haven’t even called me!”

Even if a big club calls, it’s like ……  OK, but do they need me? Am I going to be a leader or a backup signing? These questions can really mess with your head, and in the end, you have to look in the mirror and ask yourself what you really really want. 

Well, I want to go where I can be the best version of Jona.

And for me, that place is Bayern. 

I had other offers that were honestly really good. I like the idea of going abroad and learning a new language, a new culture. But for me, it always comes down to personal growth, the people and the culture, and I’ll be joining one of the top clubs in the world, with a very, very special coach. 
I began following Vincent Kompany when he played for Hamburger SV, and I was a kid who was dreaming of playing for my local team. You could see that he was about to become one of the best centre-backs in the world, and I really admired him back then. Now that he’s become one of the leaders of his generation, I admire him even more. We both have an African dad and a European mum. For me, there has always been a special connection there. 

Once you speak to him, you feel his passion, his ideas and his values. Like Xabi, he sees you as a human being first, and then as a professional. He told me about how I’d fit into the team, and how he can help me become a better centreback. 

It was just what I wanted to hear. I loved the idea of playing for him. 

In the end, I could get what I wanted right here in Germany. 

But before I begin this new chapter, I want to say goodbye properly to a place that is so special to me. And it’s a place that is honestly very, very underrated in the football world. 

For the last decade, Leverkusen has been more than just a home. It’s been like a little bubble where I’ve been able to learn and grow. There are so many people here who have taught me so much. Even a young guy like Florian Wirtz ……. What can a big centreback learn from Flo? Nobody can do what he does on the ball. But I remember the first week he was training with the first team, this kid at 17 years old, I came across a video he had done with adidas. They asked what he wanted to achieve, and he said, “I want to win the Ballon d’Or.”

A lot of players say that, right? But you could tell that Florian really meant it. It was how he said it, the steel in his eyes …….. He’s not scared of anything. When you see the work he puts in, you realise that he can pull it off. 

Florian can earn all the money in the world, but he won’t change. He has this street footballer mentality. 

To him it’s only about the game, you know? Never anything else.

I think that’s a great lesson for any footballer.

Then you have the African guys. It’s funny because when Boniface and Tapsoba came here, we were like, “Why are they so relaxed?

My dad’s from the Ivory Coast, but I grew up with German culture, and it almost looks like they don’t care what happens on the pitch. I even asked Tapsoba, “How come you are never nervous?”

He was like, “Bro, you know when I was in Africa? I played without boots. I played without a shirt. I played on dirt and gravel with a tree trunk as a goal post. The Bundesliga? This is easy.”

He and Boniface would always be laughing, telling me how they grew up showering with a bucket. They would rub down with soap, fill a bucket with water and pour it over their heads. They even told me about some days when they didn’t know if they had enough food for breakfast the next morning. So they would simply get up three hours later, right in time for lunch. They slept the hunger away. 

They brought so much joy to work every day. They appreciated how blessed we are to play a child’s game for a living, you know? 
And man, they’re just so funny .... The other day Tapsoba wanted to come to my place for a chat, just to reflect on our time here together, and I was like, “Of course, come over at 6:30 p.m.”

(In Germany, that actually means 6:25.)

The clock turns 6:30. No Tapsoba. 

6:45

I call him up. 

“Bro, where are you?”

He’s like, “I’m on my way.”

But I can hear that he’s not even in his car. I’m like, “Bro, just tell me when you’ll arrive.”

He’s like, “No, no, I’m coming bro, don’t worry.”

“Edmond ...... “

“I’ll text you when I’m there.”

I hang up and wait ....... 7 p.m. ......7:15 ..... 7:30 .... he gets there at 7:45. One hour and 15 minutes late. Even when people are a few minutes late I expect an apology, but for him it’s like nothing happened. It’s no problem because he’s there now.

That’s the mentality. Yeah I was late, but now I’m here so it’s cool. 

Even the Latinos, if we have a video meeting at 10:30, they’ll sit and chat in the dressing room until somebody tells them they’re late. It will usually be some German staff member going, “Guys, we have a meeting, we have to go.”

And I understand enough Spanish to know that they actually get really pissed. They’re like, “What’s wrong with this guy?”

They just don’t get it. “Why is he so stressed? It’s only three minutes.”

Then the video meeting starts, everyone is there, but wait …… where’s Boniface and Tabsoba? 

They haven’t even made it to the dressing room. 

They’re still in the wellness area. 

But the African guys play better like that. When the pressure is on, they chill. They’re able to put this sport into perspective, and I think a lot of players can learn from that, especially the German ones. Sometimes we’re a bit too serious, a little too tight. When you relax a little, you usually play better. 
Thankfully, Xabi was calm if someone was a little late. Three times in a row and he might go, “Come on ….” He always found the right balance. 

I think that’s what made this Leverkusen team such a beautiful experience. So many guys from so many cultures and backgrounds and vibes, just coming together and playing like a symphony. 

Every single person gave something to the group. If you asked me to name one of our most important players, I’d say our third keeper, Niklas Lomb. He’s been here for 17 years, and he knows that he most likely won’t play that many games a season, but every day he trains as if he’ll play in the Champions League final tomorrow. He’s so focused, so vocal, always pushing everyone. As a defender, you’d hear him scream that you had to close your legs near the first post so that he can cover the second post, because a shot between your legs is very hard for him to save. And if you ever forgot  ....... 

“JONA, CLOSE YOUR F****** LEGS.”

Some nights I can still hear him in my dreams. 

“Jona!!!! JONAAAAAAA!!!!”

(Google a picture of him if you don’t know what he looks like. When that guy screams at you, you do as he says.)

I’m not even sure Niklas knows how important he was to our mentality. We used to struggle against smaller teams, but last season we wanted to kill every opponent. If we played a third-tier side in the cup, we treated it like a title clash in front of 80,000 people. That’s the Niklas Lomb mentality. 

Luckily, that mindset was instilled in me when I first came here as a teenager.  

I’ll never forget my first training session here, we had a one v one drill, and I had to defend against Son Heung-min. 

We were on a pre-season camp in Austria, and it was a huge moment for me, because I was a 19-year-old kid who had been signed from HSV, and Leverkusen had paid almost 10 million euros for me. That was a lot for a teenager back then, and especially one who had just been on loan at Düsseldorf in the second division. I was really shy. I came into the cantina on the first day — and it’s really like the first day at a new school — you’re holding your tray full of food, and you’re just standing there all nervous, not knowing where you can sit. I probably stood there for 15 seconds, but it felt like 15 years. Finally, someone pointed me to an empty seat. I probably said five words that whole first lunch. 

And it’s weird because when you’re new, you want people to be like, “Oh, we’re so happy that you’re here.” But you quickly realise it doesn’t work like that in football. If they’re bringing you in, what you forget is that you’re always taking someone else’s chair. 

I even heard that some of the older guys were saying, “This kid doesn’t look that good ..... 10 million euros. Did they really pay that much for him?”

Anyway, this was just before Son signed for Tottenham. He was scary on the ball. It’s funny, we had this younger South Korean player at the time, and he had so much respect for Sonny that every time he would speak to him, or even just look at him, the kid would bow respectfully to Sonny. 

Like….

"Yes, sir. (Bow.) Yes."

Even if he asked him to pass the salt. 

"Yes, mister."

So I’m lining up for the one on ones, and of course, who is at the front of the line? 

Sonny. 

All of a sudden, he’s running at me with those quick feet, and Rudi Völler is watching, Roger Schmidt is watching ……. The whole team is watching. Son starts dribbling, and I stick a leg out. 

BAM. Right on the ball. Clean. Beautiful. 

I take the ball, I shoot and score. 

Second tackle, I win again. 

Third one, same. I don’t miss a challenge the entire session. Even when I attack, I pull off moves that I have never managed before. For a couple of seconds I look like Ronaldinho. And when I walk off the grass, I know it. 

They respect me now. They know why I’m here.
Rudi and Roger still talk about that session. Yes, I was nervous, but I had no fear. The secret was down to my mindset. 

I was ready. 

Once I had respect on the pitch, I won respect off it. I knew Hakan Çalhanoğlu from Hamburg, and I got to know Son as well before he left. Karim Bellarabi became like my big brother. Crazy guy. And I loved the mentality here, because nobody thought “Ah, we’ve made it, we’re at Leverkusen.”

They hated our nickname, Vizekusen. 

“Neverkusen.”

Always second. 

I hated it too. These were my guys. 

Things actually went so well for me that when I had a spell on the bench, I was shocked. It was in my second year with Peter Bosz, and it really surprised me because when he came in, I was his guy at the back. Suddenly he told me in a meeting, “Jona, you’re our fifth choice.”

Like yeah, you’ll play ..... if this guy gets injured …….. and this guy, and this guy. It’s not a nice feeling. 

But I didn’t go, “Ah, the coach is so s***, he doesn’t have a clue.” I focused on being ready for the moment when I’d get the chance.

You come on for two minutes? Put in the best two minutes of your life. 

Every gym session at six in the morning, when everyone’s asleep and you know you won’t play tomorrow, you’re killing it. The less I played, the more I actually trained, because I wasn’t tired from the weekend. Mentally, I grew so much. Self-pity or growth — you decide. And in the end, you can look yourself in the mirror and know you did everything you could to be on the pitch. 
I think that changed something in Peter Bosz too, because if I had started complaining, he would have thought, Yeah, I was right about him. 

That’s why those few months are my most important ones at Leverkusen. It always works out somehow. God has a plan. 

Even when you’re at the bottom, bad things happen for a reason. I remember in 2022 when we were second from bottom, like wow, really, really bad, and I had a chat with our coach, Gerardo Seoane. We both asked, “What can we do to change this?” He saw this potential in me as a leader, and he pushed me to get used to that role, which I always appreciate, but at this point we simply didn’t know what more to do. 

We tried everything. I mean literally, everything. We had a couple of players-only meetings. We tried to be serious. We tried to take the pressure off and bond by going out and having a few beers together. We tried every speech you could think of. Nothing worked. 

Again, it’s not like FIFA. Football is so complicated. Sometimes, everyone is trying everything, and giving everything, and it simply doesn’t work. 

One day Simon Rolfes came into the dressing room and said, “We’re going to bring in a new coach.”

Some of us cried, because we felt so bad for Gerardo, and we knew that it wasn’t about him. I called him up and said, “We’re so sorry.”

He said, “Don’t worry, I just hope you’ll figure it out.”

Then we heard rumours about Xabi Alonso. We knew he was still young as a coach, but we were all like, Ah, that would be really cool. And once he came in, we immediately noticed that he could still play for us. I’m serious, you could put Xabi into our team and he’d be just fine. There was a drill where we had to play long balls behind the defence to our wingbacks, and all of a sudden he stopped me. “No Jona, not like that.”

I honestly thought that I’d just played a pretty good pass, but he was like, “The ball has to be …… sharper.”
I was like, “What do you mean?”

He tried to explain, but then he said, “Here, give me the ball.”

He took a touch, turned and struck a diagonal cross that floated across to the other side, straight as an arrow. The ball landed on the shoe of one of our wingbacks, who didn’t even have to slow down to control it. Any amateur could have brought it down. 

Xabi turned to us. 

“ ….. that’s what I mean by sharper.”

I was like, You have to be joking. 

Even the sound the ball makes when he strikes it is different. Ping. You could turn away, listen to the ball and know it’s Xabi. 

I turned to my teammates and went, “How am I going to do that?”

And everyone just started laughing. None of us could do what Xabi did. 

I don’t think Xabi has gotten completely used to coaching. Deep down, he’s still a player. We would be doing passing drills and he’d be there next to us, making movements as if he was also part of the exercise. Seriously, you would see Xabi in the corner of your eye, opening up his body, ready for the pass, even though he was 15 metres away. If you played a good pass, he’d be like, “Yes, yes ..... yes! That’s it.” As if he just played the pass himself. 

When you see that you can make him that happy, you are happy, too. His passion is just crazy. 

I owe Xabi a lot, because he made me feel really important. I remember one of the first sessions we had with him, we were warming up, and he called me over, and you never know what a new coach will think about you. Maybe he’ll bench you, or even sell you. Maybe you’re not his kind of player. But he said, “I’m new here, and as a leader in the dressing room, I need you. I need you to push the guys, to transmit what I want from the team.”

I saw one video from Real Madrid where Carlo Ancelotti was doing exactly the same with another player, and I knew that Xabi had played at Madrid. It really made me feel special. 

One of the first things he told us was, “We have to work on defending crosses.”

Then he turned to me. 

“Jona …….. in the box, you’re the main guy.”

You know the goals where the striker hides behind you and then runs ahead to score? That can never happen. We worked so hard at following the man and the ball. Touching the striker so he knows we’re there, using the arm without making a foul. It’s an art. 

The other thing was positioning: How to open up the body so that you can control and pass the ball faster. The right distances to the ball. 

“Abre la cadera,” as Xabi would keep saying. 

Open up your hip. Find the triangles. 

Get the ball to Florian. 

That was always the goal, to find Florian in between the lines. Once we had that down, Xabi would find something else to work on. 

“OK, now let’s do long balls over the top.”

I loved that about Xabi. I always asked him, “What else can I do better?” And gosh, he helped me so much with the small details, stuff that you’d think is nothing special, but that when you add it all up, it changes a lot. 

When we won the title at home to Werder Bremen, I had one moment when the referee had blown the whistle, and everybody was running onto the pitch, and I pulled the shirt over my face ...... and for 10-15 seconds all the noise disappeared.
It was like one of those movie scenes where everything moves in slow motion, and you can suddenly think very clearly. You don’t hear or feel anything. You’re in a bubble, isolated from the outside world, and I remember that the season flashed before my eyes. Actually, my mind went back even further to when I was six years old in Hamburg, and my mom asked me if I could pick up my sister in kindergarten because she had to work. 

I was just a child, you know? We didn’t have a car, and my mom was in a desperate situation. She was a teacher in kindergarten, and she simply didn’t have time to go get her youngest child. I remember that she cried just from asking me to do it. But I found all the courage I could, went to the kindergarten, asked for my little sister, and took her hand. We walked through Altona, past all the people who were probably whispering, Where are their parents? I just stared right ahead, and then I guided her to our home and opened the door for her. 

When Mom came home, she cried again, partly out of guilt, and partly because she was so proud of me. And I was really proud, too. I genuinely think that’s how this whole journey started, because that was when I first became a leader. 

Everything that happens off the pitch has an influence on the pitch. 

After that memory, my mind flashed forward to my first training session and Son Heung-min. “What, 10 million for him?”

The time I was benched. The problems with Gerardo. 

The first chat with Xabi. 

All the games we had won and lost together, all the training sessions and team talks and video meetings. And now we were champions. 

Neverkusen was dead. 

And all I could think was, We did it. 

We really did it. 

And then the spell broke, and the noise came back, and everyone was jumping on me and hugging me. 

I think that moment showed me what it meant to me to win this title. It wasn’t just that I had won the Bundesliga. I had done it with this club, with this coach and these teammates. 

To all of you, thank you for sharing that moment with me. Thank you for being part of this incredible chapter in my life.

In the end, my wife was right, you know? 

It’s not only about football, but all the wonderful people you meet. 

It’s about the memories you make. 

The things you learn for life. 

All because of this beautiful game — football. 

Sincerely, Jona
Para ler em português, clique aqui.

I have this vision of my father as a younger man. It is deeper than just a memory. Memories are hazy, you know? This is different. This is colourful. It’s warm. Almost like a dream. 

I think I am probably 3 years old, but I’m already kicking a mini football in our living room with my brother Muriel. He’s 8, and I’m already following him everywhere. I have “the rope tied around his waist,” as we say. 

My father just came home from a long day of work, and he’s laying down on the couch, fully reclined. You know how fathers lay down after a long day, like they weigh 400 pounds? “Ahhhhhhhh…. Tô cansado pra caramba….” 

In Brazil, it’s a certain posture. He’s got the pillow under his head, and he’s got his right arm hanging down over the couch.

Me and my brother come running into the room, and we start shaking him. 

“Paaaiiiiii! Come on!!!” 

He protests for a few seconds, and then he rolls off the couch and onto the carpet.

“Yesssss!!!!” 

Then my father rolls all the way under the couch. He disappears. All you can see are two big arms coming out from the darkness, waving around like mad. 

“You’ll never score today. I am Taffarel!” 

It’s the World Cup. The carpet is our pitch. The gap under the couch is our goal. My father’s big hands are Taffarel. 

My brother is Rivaldo, Bebeto, Ronaldo, Dunga….

I get to be whoever he doesn’t pick. (The fate of all little brothers.)
It’s so vivid that I can even smell it. I can smell the couch. I can smell my mom cooking dinner. I can smell my father’s clothes. 

I can see his big hands waving back and forth, trying to make a heroic penalty save in the World Cup Final. Every once in a while, he pops his head out from under the couch and pulls his clown face. My brother and I are laughing like crazy. 

Not only can I close my eyes and see it …. I can feel it, like it was just yesterday. 


When I got the call that my father died, I was an ocean away from home. I was in Liverpool, and we were in the middle of the 2020-2021 season. His death was sudden. A complete shock. My mother called me and told me that there had been an accident and that my father had drowned at the lake by our house. All I remember was I felt so lost. It did not seem possible that someone like my father could actually be gone. He was a “man’s man,” as they say. As strong as they come. 

I had always heard these stories about him as a kid. He was a goalkeeper, too. It runs in our DNA, I guess. On the pitch, they said he had absolutely no fear. He would charge out and throw his face right into the attacker’s boot. 

“Your father, he was mad,” his buddies told me. 

I thought it was just a story. But it was actually true, and it was a lot deeper than just football. 

On a football pitch, or in real life, he was a man in full. Everything he ever did, it was always “family first.” Always
When he died, it destroyed me. I could not even think about football. I had to keep remembering that I even played football, and that we were fighting for the Top 4. It was even more complicated, because it was right in the middle of the pandemic, and the logistics of getting home were a nightmare. My wife was pregnant with our third child, and Covid was exploding again in Brazil. Her doctor said that it was risky for her to travel, so she had to stay in Liverpool with our kids. That was total anguish for her, because she loved my father so much. We always joked that he loved her the most. If we ever had a little disagreement in front of my father, he would always say, “I think Natália is right.” 

She was the daughter he never had. 

I was going to have to fly to Brazil alone. 

The following two or three days were a blur. The next thing I remember was all the flowers coming to our house. From Virgil, Andy, Fabinho, Firmino, Thiago…. on and on. All my brothers. Everyone sent us flowers with a note of condolences. And not just from my teammates, but even Pep Guardiola and Carlo Ancelotti sent me a condolence letter. It really touched my heart. Every 10 minutes, there was another knock at our door, with a delivery man holding flowers. 

I don’t think those people can understand how much something small like that means when you’re suffering. It was a reminder that even your biggest rivals recognise the human behind the name on the kit. 

I’ll never forget, Jürgen called me, and I was feeling so guilty about missing training, because we were outside the Top 4, and we needed every point. But Jürgen told me to take as much time as I needed. 

I said, “Yes, but, but….”

He said, “No, no. Do not worry about anything.”
Jürgen had lost his own father around the same age, and he understood my pain very well. He was not just a manager to me, but more like a second father. I think everyone could see that, from the moment that he came sprinting like a madman half way across the pitch to jump into my arms when Origi scored against Everton. I pull up that clip on my phone once in a while, and I laugh every time. But there were so many moments that the public never sees, where we would sit on the bus after away matches and toast the wins with a beer, like a proper German and a proper Brazilian.

Jürgen allowed me to take the time to grieve, and not a lot of managers would have been so understanding. To me, it’s the Liverpool way. It’s just different here. Even the players are different. Ray Haughan, who was our team manager at the time, texted me and told me that the boys had all come together and agreed to pay for a private flight for me to go to the funeral so that I wouldn’t have to worry about anything. But it was an impossible situation, because at that time, in order to fly out of the country, you had to be quarantined in a hotel for 14 days when you returned. The thought of coming back from my father’s funeral and being trapped in a hotel room by myself for two weeks was hard, but the worst part was imagining my wife on her own for that long. She was going to be in her third trimester, and anything could happen. 

I called my mom and my brother, and I explained the situation, and that was the most brutal phone call of my life. We cried a lot, but in the end, I decided that my father would want me to stay with my children and his “favourite daughter” and protect them, no matter how hard it was. That was how he lived his life, and that was the best way to honour him. 
Every chance that I had to hug him, I hugged him. Every chance I had to tell him that I loved him, I told him. There was nothing left unsaid. He knew.

Still, I have never felt so far away from home. 

We had to watch his funeral on FaceTime. My brother held up the phone for the entire service, and I was able to pray and cry with my mother, and even say goodbye to my father at his casket. In that moment, as strange as it sounds, you forget that you’re on a screen. All your memories and your love bridge the distance, and you are speaking to your father in eternity. 

It’s true, I didn’t have anything left to tell him. We had already said it all. The only thing left for me to say was, “thank you.” 

Not just for being my father, but for being my friend. 

Without my teammates and without the club, I would not have been able to deal with that time in my life. When I returned to training a few days after the funeral, I would think about my father at random times. I couldn’t help it. I would have a flash of him standing on the sidelines when I was a kid watching me play, standing there like a true stoic, not saying a word. Or fishing with him at the lake, or sitting around the barbeque with him drinking chimarrão, saying a couple words every five minutes. Or him smashing his whole face into a birthday cake in celebration when Taffarel made that famous penalty save in ’98. Or him laying on the couch after a long day, still having just enough strength to crawl under the couch and pretend to be Taffarel…. 

I would have these flashes and I would start crying. Right there in training. 

Imagine trying to sort out the wall to stop Trent’s free kick, and you ha
But my teammates were unbelievable. They never once judged me. They acted like they were all a part of my family and they were in mourning, too. Being able to train again brought me a sense of calm. I always say that I did not “choose” football. You cannot choose what is unconscious, what is already in your bones. 

In Brazil, football is a wave that you ride. 

Returning to the pitch was one of the main things that brought me peace. I rode the wave to calm waters. 

When I would come home from training, I would be so tired. All I would want to do is lay down on the couch, just like my father. Feet up, chimarrão in one hand, pillow under my head. And every single day, like clockwork, my son Matteo would come running into the living room after school and put the ball right in my hand. 

“Let’s plaaaaaayyyyyyyyyyy!”

He’s 5 years old, and he loves football. The way we figured out that he knew how to spell was because we went onto YouTube and in the search history bar all you saw was…..

‘livrpol’ 

‘hi liit liverpol’

‘livrpool dad save’

‘liverpool vs meelan’ 

‘all we need is alisson becker song’

(The last one is for my daughter, Helena — she wants to sing at breakfast every morning.) 

Matteo kept getting better and better, until he could finally spell Liverpool. He gets so mad when we make him go to bed during the late Champions League matches. He’s crushed! The first thing he does as soon as he wakes up is watch the highlights on YouTube.
So far, I get no criticism. 

“We tied last night.”

“Oh yeah? We did?”

“Yeah, they scored and we scored. I love you, daddy.”

Then it’s always time to play on the floor. It doesn’t matter how tired I am. Daddy has to be the keeper. 

We started out playing with the bottom of the couch as our goal, and then he finally made us buy him a “real one.” We put the mini goal in front of the couch, and I lay on the floor and try to stop him, like my father tried to stop me.  

The carpet is our pitch. 

My son is Mo or Trent or Vini Jr. 

I always tell him that I want to be Taffarel. But I have to be Alisson. 
The story is repeating itself. 

And the story is expanding. 

Three months after my father’s death, my son Rafael was born. For my wife and I, it was like hope was reborn. A light shone in our lives again. His name had a special meaning for us. It comes from the Hebrew, meaning “God has healed.” 

Six days after Rafael was born, something happened that I still cannot explain. 

We were playing a crucial match against West Brom. We were fighting for our place in the Champions League, and we had to win that match. It was one of those days where it feels like nothing is working, and it was 1-1 with a few seconds remaining. As a keeper, you are just standing in your box in those moments, feeling helpless. 

But then we won a corner. And our goalkeeping coach shouted for me to run up the pitch. There was nothing to lose. So I ran up the pitch as fast as I could, and I arrived in the box just as Trent was taking the corner. To be honest, as a keeper, you never, ever, ever think that you are actually going to score. 

Just get into the box and create chaos. 

The next thing I know, the ball is coming at my face. I flick my head and I fall to the ground. Then I am just surrounded by a warm glow. That’s the only way I can describe it. Everyone is hugging me. Thiago is hugging me and crying. Firmino is hugging me and crying and laughing at the same time. Mo is celebrating like a little kid, jumping up and down. I have never seen him so happy after someone else scored a goal hahaha!! Complete joy.

It was almost more special that we were still playing in the empty stadiums, without the roar of the fans, because the only thing that I could feel was the love of my teammates, who had gotten me through the hardest time of my life. Our whole bench, the staff, and the kitmen were all cheering so loud that it felt like we were back in front of the Kop again. 

I remember I looked up to the heavens, and it was one of those grey rainy days in England. But for me, the sky was filled with light. 

I said, “Pai…. pai…..” 

It’s for you, Dad! 

When I got back to the dressing room, I was sitting there taking off my boots, and in those moments, when you lose someone close to you, it’s impossible not to ask yourself the question……..

“Did he see it? Was he watching?”

I am a man of faith. Many people know that. But a lot of people do not know that it was not always this way. Real faith came to me later in life. When I was young, we were “at home” Christians. My parents prayed every day, but we rarely went to Church. I believed in God, but I believed in a distant God. As I got older, and I experienced more of life — both joy and pain — I realised that God is closer than you can ever imagine. 

Faith is not something that can be seen, or even put into words. It is a force that is more powerful than just a feeling of emotion, or a slogan. It is the complete trust in the Son of God, Jesus Christ.

I think of this every time I hear the opening words to the most powerful song in football. 

“When you walk …. through a storm….”

There are 5,000 different songs in football, all over the world. But there is only one song that touches the heart in this way. Why is that? I think it is because it is really about the deeper meaning of life. 

No matter who you are, one day, you will face real suffering. Your dreams will be tossed and blown. You will lose people in your life who you love very much. 

In those moments, you can’t help asking yourself the hardest question in the world: “Are they still looking down on us? Will I see them again?” 

I hope to meet my father again one day. I hope to see him on the shores of eternity with a chimarrão in his hand, and maybe we will go fishing, just like old times. Not saying much, just enjoying the water.

Until that day, I know one thing for sure: I never, ever walk alone. In these last four years since my father’s death, my teammates, coaches, friends and neighbours have shown me and my family incredible love and support. And I know that a part of my Dad is still here with us, too. Not just in my dreams, but every time I come home from training and I lay down on the couch, feeling like I weigh 400 pounds, and I hear Matteo and Rafael’s footsteps coming from the other room. 

Women’s World Cup: the science of what makes a good football game for fans
The 2019 FIFA Women’s World Cup has got off to a record breaking start. The US beat Thailand 13-0, claiming the biggest ever Women’s World Cup win, showing why they are first in the world rankings. A record 6.1m tuned in to watch England beat Scotland, making it the UK’s most watched women’s game of all time.

The viewing figures are proof that the popularity of the women’s game is growing – with many football fans keen to tune in and support their country. But while this is great news for the sport, there still tends to be much less interest in women’s national football teams compared to the men’s teams.

This is in part down to the fact that the development of women’s football has been historically disadvantaged by national associations banning their members from allowing women’s football to be played at their grounds. These bans started in 1921 and were only lifted in 1971. As sports writer Jim Weeks notes, “by this time, half a century of progress had been lost”. Of course, there is also far less money in women’s football today, compared with men’s, but there could also be another major factor.

Competitive balance
My research looks at competitive balance and intensity in women’s as well as men’s football. Competitive balance is a key concept in sports economics. The main idea is that there is a need for equilibrium between teams’ playing strengths to generate enough uncertainty for fans to be interested. Essentially, people prefer to watch games with teams that are close in ability levels rather than a game where one team is far better than the other. This is because, from a viewer’s perspective, it makes for a better match and a more uncertain finish.

Competitive balance goes beyond sports economics to relate to psychology and sociology. Indeed, Stefan Szymanski and Andrew Zimbalist noted in 2005 that fan interest is supposed to come from the satisfaction of emotional and spiritual needs. It can be seen as a “quest for excitement”, consistent with what Aristotle called “the tragic pleasure”.
A key factor that can affect the competitive balance at international level is the way the sport is developed in different countries. Large differences in the development of the game across countries can lead to large differences on the pitch – with certain games being less interesting for fans to watch. This tends to be the games between countries that have vastly different amounts of funding put into the game and where there is not the same youth development or scouting for the football stars of the future. All of which can impact levels of participation across countries, as well as the different levels of experience across national teams.
Women close the gap
As part of my research I’ve looked at and compared the competitive balance of both the women’s and men’s World Cup games since 1990. To do this, I calculated the percentage of game-time with a difference of no more than one goal between teams.My results show that historically, women’s World Cups have always been less balanced than men’s, but that this gap has considerably reduced over time.

The findings show that the percentage of game-time with a difference of no more than one goal was 64% in the 1991 Women’s World Cup, and 90% in the 1990 Men’s World Cup. Then in the 2015 Women’s World Cup, it was 81% for women vs. 87% for men in the 2014 World Cup – making it a much more exciting and competitive tournament for fans. This may be one reason why the 2015 edition of the Women’s World Cup was the most watched in history.
But competitive balance isn’t the only factor that makes a football match more appealing to fans. It also matters whether there is something at stake for at least one of the sides – this is known as competitive intensity – and it explains why knock out matches or games where at least one side could go ahead if they win, tend to be so much better to watch.

When looking at competitive intensity in World Cup games, the percentage of game time with something at stake for at least one team was 81% for women in 2015 compared with 80% for men in 2014. In other words, there was slightly more game time with actual uncertainty in women’s football – with at least one team having something to compete for.

So when it comes to selecting the best matches to watch as a football fan, you want to be going for those games that are predicted to be close, with teams of equal standing, or where one side has a lot to lose – these games make for a much better viewing experience. Yes, games like like US thrashing Thailand 13-0 are spectacular, but from a fan perspective nothing beats a closely contested grudge match between two rival teams who are both going for glory.

Arsenal transfer news, rumours and gossip: Live updates and latest on deals, signings, loans and contracts
Gabriel would like 'phenomenon' Rodrygo at Arsenal
Gabriel Magalhaes has described Arsenal transfer target Rodrygo as a “phenomenon” and admitted he would like to see him join Arsenal.

The Real Madrid winger, who plays with Gabriel for Brazil, is of interest to the Gunners this summer as they look to strengthen their attack.

Rodrygo could be made available for a transfer by his club, according to reports, and Gabriel has said he would like his international team-mate join him at the Emirates Stadium, although he is in the dark about whether it will happen.

Asked if he knows whether Rodrygo is coming to Arsenal, Gabriel told the Podpah podcast in Brazil: “I don’t know. I would like it but who knows? Rodrygo for me is a phenomenon.

“People are mentioning his name a lot. If it depended on me, of course. As I said, he is a phenomenon.”

Arsenal also have Athletic Club's Nico Williams on their wide forward shortlist. They have an interest in Benjamin Sesko and Viktor Gyokeres in the striker position.
AC Milan exploring Zinchenko deal
 AC Milan are exploring the conditions of a potential deal for Arsenal left-back Oleksandr Zinchenko, according to Sky in Italy.

The 28-year-old has one year left on his deal at Arsenal and Sky in Italy are reporting that his wages are a potential obstacle for Milan. 

The Italian club are looking for a potential replacement for Theo Hernandez with Atletico Madrid trying to sign the France international.

Zinchenko has fallen down the pecking order at Arsenal since the emergence of Myles Lewis-Skelly this season.

Zinchenko, who signed for Arsenal from Man City in a £32m deal in the summer of 2022, attracted interest from Atletico and Borussia Dortmund in January.
Cazorla rolls back the years at 40
Former Arsenal favourite Santi Cazorla's stunning free-kick at the age of 40 put his boyhood club Real Oviedo a game away from promotion to LaLiga on Wednesday night.

Cazorla, who scored 29 goals in 180 games for Arsenal, found the bottom corner with his supposedly weaker foot against Almeria as Oviedo clinched a 3-2 aggregate win to reach the Spanish second division play-off final.

Cazorla is captaining Oviedo in his second season at the club having also had spells with Villarreal and Al Sadd since his Emirates Stadium departure in 2018.

Last year, he told Sky Sports that his friend and former team-mate Mikel Arteta had left the door open to him to return to Arsenal as part of his backroom staff but it seems he has more to offer as a player. In total, he has contributed three goals and five assists in 32 league appearances for Oviedo this season.

Oviedo will face either Mirandes or Racing Santander in the play-off final. They reached the same juncture last season but were beaten by Espanyol with Cazorla only able to feature as a substitute due to injury.
Partey: My future is not up to me
Thomas Partey has hinted that he would like to stay at Arsenal but insists the decision lies with his agent and the club.

The midfielder is in the final weeks of his contract at Arsenal but talks are ongoing over a new deal and manager Mikel Arteta has said he wants to extend his stay at the Emirates Stadium.

In comments made to TV3 in Ghana, Partey has suggested the stability of staying at Arsenal would suit his family.

"I think the first thing is where are you happy? Where do you feel at home? And then what is your next objective and what do you want to achieve next?

"There are a lot of things. You have to look now where your family will be happy. When you are young, you can just go anywhere.

"I can’t decide anything, it’s up to my agent and the club. Me, I just want to enjoy football."

Arsenal have already allowed fellow midfielder Jorginho to leave for Flamengo this summer, with Martin Zubimendi expected to arrive from Real Socieded for £51m as his replacement.

Partey's departure would necessitate another new signing in midfield.
Rodrygo named in Real Madrid's CWC squad
Rodrygo has been included in Real Madrid's Club World Cup squad.

The Brazilian - who Sky Sports News revealed is a top target for Arsenal this summer - has been included in the squad alongside forwards Vinicius Jr, Kylian Mbappe and Jude Bellingham.

New Real signings Trent Alexander-Arnold and Dean Huijsen have been also been picked for the United States tournament. 
Sane set for Galatasaray medical
Latest from Sky Sports News' Dharmesh Sheth:

Leroy Sane is flying to Istanbul tonight for a medical with Galatasaray.

Discussions are still ongoing about whether or not will still be selected for Bayern Munich’s Club World Cup squad.

His contract with Bayern expires on July 1. 

Sane was offered to Arsenal and linked to Tottenham Hotspur but will now play his football in Turkey.
Athletic trying to tie down Williams
Athletic Club are attempting to tie Arsenal target Nico Williams to a new contract, according to Spanish newspaper AS.

With the 22-year-old's current deal due to expire in 2027, his boyhood club are eager to secure his long-term future on improved terms, although the report claims raising his €58m (£49m) release clause is proving a stumbling block in negotiations.

Williams is of interest to Arsenal as they look to strengthen their attack this summer. The club are also admirers of Real Madrid's Rodrygo.

AS also name Chelsea and Bayern Munich among Williams' suitors following his excellent performances for Athletic Club and Spain, with whom he won the European Championship last year.
No offers received for Gyokeres'
Sporting president Federico Varandas insists the club have received no offers for Man Utd and Arsenal target Viktor Gyokeres and says their asking price is higher than the £59m fee touted this summer.

Robert Lewandowski left ‘betrayed and hurt’ by coach in Poland captaincy row
Robert Lewandowski has said that he has been left feeling “betrayed” and “very hurt” by the head coach of the Polish national team, Michal Probierz, after quitting the setup because of a row over losing the captaincy. The Barcelona striker was stripped of the armband on Sunday by Probierz, who has appointed the midfielder Piotr Zielinski as captain instead.

Lewandowski then announced he was quitting the national team on social media, citing a “loss of trust in the coach”, refusing to return to play for his country “for as long as [the coach] remains in charge”. Probierz has been in charge of Poland since 2023, with Lewandowski leading the team at Euro 2024 last summer. “I hope I will still have another chance to play again for the best fans in the world,” the 36-year-old said.

Cristiano Ronaldo kisses the trophy surrounded by his delighted teammates
Portugal sink Spain in penalty shootout to win Nations League crown
Read more
In an interview with the Polish website WP SportoweFakty on Monday, Lewandowski was scathing in his criticism of how Probierz had handled the situation. “I haven’t been captain for a year or two. I’ve been wearing the armband for 11 years, and I’ve been playing for the national team for 17. It seemed to me that such matters should be handled differently,” he said.

“Everything was communicated over the phone. It really shouldn’t be like this. The coach betrayed my trust … The national team has always been the most important thing to me. At the same time, I’m very hurt by what happened. It’s not even about the decision regarding the armband, but about the way it was communicated to me.”

At a press conference on Monday, Probierz said that he had called Lewandowski on Sunday night from Finland, where Poland play on Tuesday, about his decision to hand Zielinski the captain’s armband. “Robert replied that the armband means nothing and it won’t change anything in the team,” Probierz said.

About a second call with the striker later that evening, Probierz said: “He told me to make it sound like he had given up the armband. I replied that I wouldn’t do that. Later, I learned from the media that Robert had given up playing for the national team. No one is closing the door on him, but I wish him luck … There are situations in life when you get offended and then you move on. In football, you can’t get offended.”

When asked whether he had considered retiring from international football altogether, Lewandowski, who also accused Probierz of “caving into media pressure” and “breaking agreements”, said: “I want to sit down and think about it all calmly. I need to catch my breath. Then I will be able to say more about my thoughts and what’s next. Today there is regret and anger. I have always cared a lot about the national team. Nothing has changed in that respect.”

The striker, who is by some distance Poland’s record appearance-maker and top scorer, was not included in Probierz’s squad for their fixtures in June in order to rest after finishing the club season with Barcelona. “Playing in the white and red colours has always been a dream come true for me, but sometimes the body gives a signal that it is necessary to take a breather for a moment,” Lewandowski wrote on social media on 2 June.

Lewandowski did however attend Friday’s friendly win against Moldova, appearing on the bench alongside the head coach Probierz, as Poland bade farewell to the forward Kamil Grosicki, who was earning his 95th and final cap.

Two days later, the Polish FA said Lewandowski had been replaced by Zielinski as captain of the national team “by decision of the coach”. A statement said: “The coach personally informed Robert Lewandowski, the entire team and the training staff of his decision”. Probierz said on Monday that “the time and place in which such decisions are made is always very difficult, especially since he is an outstanding player, but I decided that this is a good time for a change.”

Lewandowski has made 158 appearances for Poland – 49 more than the second-highest cap holder Jakub Blaszczykowski – and scored 85 goals – 37 more than the second top scorer, Wlodzimierz Lubanski. He has played at two World Cups and four European Championships, including Euro 2012, jointly hosted by Poland and Ukraine. Lewandowski first captained his country in a World Cup qualifier against San Marino in 2013.

Poland face Finland in Helsinki on Tuesday night looking to keep up their 100% record in qualifying for the 2026 World Cup.


 This article is more than 2 years old
Lewandowski and Messi lead Poland and Argentina in clash of styles
The two veteran superstars have competed for individual awards before and will both carry their nations’ hopes

Louise Taylor
Louise Taylor in Doha
Share
Mirror mirror on the wall, who is the sharpest of them all? On Wednesday night all eyes at Stadium 974 will be drawn, inexorably, to football’s version of a beauty contest: can Lionel Messi’s rich attacking gifts guide Argentina into the knockout phase or might Robert Lewandowski’s uncanny efficiency in front of goal enable Poland to eclipse the Group C favourites?

“We rely on these great strikers but an individual cannot win alone,” Czeslaw Michniewicz, Poland’s head coach, said on Tuesday. “But it’s not only a battle between Lewandowski and Messi – it’s not tennis, it’s not one-on-one, they are not serving! Robert needs his teammates, the same as Leo.”

Nonetheless Michniewicz, whose side top Group C, one point ahead of Argentina, likens the South American team’s talisman to the famous 80s and 90s Italian alpine ski champion Alberto Tomba. “At our team briefing we talked about Alberto Tomba on the slope; he was able to avoid everyone,” the 52-year-old said. “So I need to put my players in positions to make a difference because, if not, Messi will score easily. You need more than one person to halt him.”
The similarities between Tomba’s technical slalom excellence and the PSG forward’s elusive attacking manoeuvring have led to Poland’s players debating how to stop “Messi dancing between the poles” as they ponder the best way to prevent him leading Argentina’s dressing room in a celebratory post-match jig of joy.

So how, precisely, can they rein in a player who has scored 93 goals in 167 international appearances? Michniewicz turned realistic and rhetorical. “Playing Argentina you have to prepare for when you concede and to avoid panic when that happens,” he said. “How to stop Messi is a great question. The world has been thinking about it for several years and I don’t think we’ll find an answer. At 35 he says this is his last World Cup so I expect he’ll be very ambitious.”

At 34 Lewandowski accepts it could be his swansong, too, and Argentina’s head coach, Lionel Scaloni, is certainly not underestimating the threat posed by a centre-forward who believes a habit of eating desserts before main courses and protecting his slightly stronger right foot by sleeping on his left side have helped to make him Poland’s record scorer with 77 goals in 136 games.
“Lewandowski’s a top player,” Scaloni said, emphatically. He may disagree with the notion that dessert first aids fat burning but he also appreciates the jeopardy “Lewangoalski” could pose his team on a night when they may require victory to guarantee progress. “As a football fan it’s a pleasure and a privilege to see Robert up close. You have to enjoy such a great player … but we’ll be prepared for him.”

Lewandowski’s goal in the 2-0 win against Saudi Arabia last Saturday – incredibly the Barcelona striker’s first at a World Cup – left Poland requiring a point at most to reach the knockout phase. Argentina, meanwhile, remain in slight shock after their opening 2-1 defeat against Saudi Arabia.

Scaloni could certainly do with Messi adding to the penalty he scored against the Saudis and the goal he registered in the rather more reassuring 2-0 win against Mexico.

“I know all of Argentina counts on Messi,” Michniewicz said. “We’ll respect him but we will still believe we can win.”

Lionel Messi leaps into Ángel Di María’s arms after scoring Argentina’s opener against Mexico
‘I threw him a turd’: Di María credits Messi with polishing the unpolishable
Read more
Given that Argentina had gone 36 games undefeated before slipping up against Saudi Arabia that may be a tall order but Lisandro Martínez, Scaloni’s Manchester United defender, did not sound overly confident. “Poland’s a very tough opponent and Lewandowski’s a top player,” he said. “Lewandowski moves so well, he’s so dynamic. We know we have to remain focused throughout the 90 minutes.

“But we have to trust ourselves and our football. We were very anxious before the Mexico match because we knew it was all or nothing. We know what we’re capable of but we also know we haven’t reached our best level yet. But we’re trying. We have to remain calm, give it our all and show the style we are known for.”

The Messi/Lewandowski subplot is amplified by the pair’s careers having often run along parallel lines. Although a very different sort of forward, Poland’s captain effectively replaced Messi at the Camp Nou after the latter’s departure for PSG and, despite the pair having not always seemed exactly best friends when competing for individual awards, there is talk that these two attacking gladiators could yet be united for one last hurrah at Barcelona.

“When Messi was there I went to Barça so many times to see him,” said Michniewicz. “We should all be excited to play against him in a match where the stakes are high. This is a wonderful time – but I want to leave happy.”